This is Audible.  This is Alpha Trader, the mindset methodology and Mathematics of professional Trading.  Written by Brent Donnelly.  Narrated by Brent Donnelly.  if you're reading this forward, you're probably considering whether or not to buy this book,  you also probably have a professional or semi-professional connection to financial markets.  Maybe you are already work on a trading desk. Maybe you work in sales at 1 of those 2, big to fail outfits and trade in your personal account.  Maybe you don't currently work in the financial industry at all, but you've been spending a lot of hours on Robin Hood and you're thinking about taking your involvement to the next level, whatever that means to you.  In any event, you're reading this forward for Clues. As to whether this book will make you. A better Trader, whether it will help you make more money.  It will.  Why will alpha Trader help you become a better Trader?  Not because it tells you what to think as a successful Trader, not because it gives you instructions on trading this or trading that no, no, no.  It's because Alpha Trader teaches you. How to think as a successful Trader?  And that's what makes all the difference is. The only thing that makes a difference in every game that we humans play here. I'll give you an example of what I mean.  If you're not a serious chess player, you've never heard of Aaron. Nims, a witch.  If you are a serious chess player, you undoubtedly have a dog-eared copy of his groundbreaking book. My system first published in 1925.  What was the Revolutionary about Nims, which is book?  I wasn't a collection of openings. It wasn't a list of Moves and counter moves that you should memorize.  It wasn't a manual full of instructions.  No. Nims, which is book. Doesn't tell you what to think about Chess.  It teaches you how to think about Chess how to think about position, how to think about the flow of the game, how to think about risk-taking and aggression, how to think about Edge and strategic Dynamics.  Sounds pretty dry, right?  Not in the least. My system is written with wit with a point of view. My system is chock full of examples and illustrations but presented as annotated stories of personal experience.  Not constructed applications of pure Theory.  These are the same topics covered in Alpha Trader position flow, risk-taking Edge, strategic Dynamics, all Amplified by Brent Donnelly's, keen understanding of the pervasive role of variance and chance.  The crucial. Difference, that makes the game of market so much more difficult than the game of chess.  This is the same format and style of alpha Trader. With a point of view, annotated personal experiences all in service to illuminating a frame of thought rather than wrote instruction, I think that Alpha Trader and Brent Donnelly are to the game of markets. What my system and Aaron nimzowitsch are to the game of chess.  Truly revolutionary, truly useful books and authors that will change forever. How you think about playing their games with Mastery? But wait, there's more  Yes, Alpha Trader will help all you professional and semi-professional and professional wannabe Traders become better Traders.  This book will help you make more money. You should buy this book and you should read it cover to cover, and then you should give this book to your partner, or your father, or your daughter, or your close friend, someone who has never traded a day in their life. Someone who has no professional or semi-professional connection to financial markets whatsoever and ask them to read this book, please.  Because Alpha Trader won't only make you a better Trader. It won't only help you make more money from Trading.  It will make you a better player of games.  Back in, 1988 enm Banks, wrote a book called the player of games. Part of a wonderful series of science fiction, novels that describes the culture, a super Advanced Galactic Civilization.  In this book, the culture sends a representative to negotiate with a less Advanced civilization, where everyone's social and political status is determined by how well they play. A very complicated game.  The cultures representative enters the global tournament himself.  and despite only a few years to study a game that all of the inhabitants, Of the civilization spend their lives playing.  He manages spoiler alert to win the game.  How because anyone can Master the rules, even the intricacies of the rules of any game.  There's nothing special in that there's no Edge.  What is a special however, and where there is Edge?  Comes in the very personal and very human understanding of position.  Informational flow variance, risk-taking, and strategic dynamics, that shape all gains.  And not to burst anyone's bubble but that less Advanced civilization, where everyone's social and political status is determined by how well they play. A very complicated game.  That's us. That's Earth. That's the modern human civilization. That's the very complicated game of markets and politics and social. Actions that we all play all the time in ways, both large and small.  It's the single most important determinant for success. In our financialized and CI and gamified world.  Regardless of where you sit or what you do in that world.  Are you an effective player of games?  I think that Alpha Trader can help anyone Trader or not.  Become a more effective player of games.  It sure did for me then hunt co-founder and CIO, Epsilon Theory.  Hi, my name is Brent Donnelly, and this is Alpha Trader. The mindset methodology and Mathematics of professional trading. Thanks a lot for buying the audio book. I hope you enjoy it. This book was written by me and this audio book will be narrated by me. And I got a lot of help from Justin Ross on audio production, sound quality and editing. Thank you, Justin. And thank you. Matt Thompson for the super funky intro and interstitial music.  A quick story before we start.  Fairfield County. Connecticut, May 6th 2010 4:55 a.m.  The Connecticut air is cold and damp, the trader moves in silence. He steps quietly through the pitch black darkness of his Colonial mcmansion and toward the door.  As he disarms the home security system, the beep beep, beep, beep of the keypad code. He enters is impossibly loud in the quiet of the pre-dawn morning. He steps out of the house, closes and locks the door and hops into his car.  As he rolls down the driveway and into the foggy morning. He inserts a dead mouse CD and blasts it at high volume in an effort to wake up and get pumped for another day of trading.  But this will not just be another day of trading, this will be 1 of the most insane trading days of his career.  It's been a frustrating year so far, the Eurozone crisis has been smoldering for months, but the Traders attempts to sell the Euro have been met with massive counter Trend rallies as the FED embarks on another round of dollar negative quantitative easing or QE.  They call euro dollar, a collision of 2 garbage trucks. The trader struggles to steer clear of the wreckage  His strongest view recently has been lowered dollar yen.  There's risk, aversion popping up all over the place as markets. Worry about a domino effect, where Greece crashes out of the Euro Zone, followed by Spain, Portugal, Ireland. And then finally, Italy,  Everyone is bare stocks as the S&P. 500 Rally from 666. In March 2009 to 1050. Now is seen as a mirage. Side effect of a money printing. Magic trick performed by Central Bankers. Totally unsustainable euro dollar opened the year at 1:45 and now, trade sub 125. So, the short trade is hard to stomach. Even when you know, it's the right thing to do, it takes a lot of courage to sell something down more than 15%.  So the trader has shifted his attention to dollar Yen and he expects it to go substantially lower AS Global risk. Aversion remains elevated and Safe Haven currencies. Like the N should find demand Dolan has been inexplicably. Well been given recent risk aversion and the fed money printing.  Just rallied from 90 to 94 on are over the last 2 weeks. Meanwhile, the best leading indicator for dollar yen, is always us bond yields and they've been plummeting for a month. Dian looks completely wrong.  The trader stares at a chart, which shows us 10 year bond yields in dollar yen.  usually, they follow in lock step, but now there's a massive Divergence with yields cropping out And dollar yet at the highs.  The Divergence is a strong signal to the trader that he should be short dollar yen.  2 days in a row. The high has been 94.99 and Dianne is now. Bouncing aimlessly around 93.8 as he rolls into the hedge fund parking lot.  It's still early. So there are only 3 Porsche 911s in the lot right now, more will arrive later.  The Stellar Yen trade has been tiring and painful as the trader got short at 94 0 with the stop loss at 95 055 and those 2 daily Highs at 94.99 mean he's come within a hair 6 Pips or 0.064% of getting stopped out 2 days in a row.  holding on to a trade like this is exhausting as his fight or flight stress system remains activated for long, stretches cortisol overload,  Now, he can relax a bit and let things play out his targets 9100.  The average daily range. Has been about 1 Yen or 100 Pips lately, so he figures we might get there in the next week or so.  10:45 a.m.  It's been a boring morning with Dianne in a tight range, the Sun comes out. It's almost shorts weather outside. So the trader decides to go for a run before lunch  Listen, a mile into his run, he gets his first indication that this is not a random Ordinary Day.  His BlackBerry rings.  Bank sales on the line to tell him. Diane has just dumped 100 points and 15 minutes trading 9280. Now uh,  He turns around and Sprints back to the office. Spidey sense tingling.  By the time you grab a quick shower and returns to the desk Dianne is 9150. He short 100 million dollar Yen. So that puts his Prophet, AKA p&l or profit and loss around plus 2.8 million on the day.  That's more pnl than this Trader typically makes in an excellent month. A huge haul.  he scans at Headlines and Bloomberg chats, and finds no good explanation for what's going on the stock market's down. But not enough, to explain the move in dollar Yen, this makes no sense.  When a trade shows a big profit, that makes no sense. He likes to cover it and move on.  Trader buys a hundred million dollar Yen at 9150?  He's back to Flat with no position and nearly 3 bucks. A p&l in the bank.  He sits there calmly and processes. What has happened? He allows himself to feel happy just for a second.  He stuck to his plan and had the patience to sit with the decent sized position for 3 days. He relaxes and Bes in the satisfaction of a job. Well done.  then some dumb voice in his brain says,  2.8 million is an amazing day but maybe I can make 5 million today.  And his hands as if possessed by some mischievous or evil force move slowly toward the buy and sell buttons for no reason and like a moron. He goes long. In.  First, he buys 50 million at 9150, then another 50 million at 9125. These are impulsive trades with no rationale, his plan stop-loss is 9085, but before he has time to input a stop-loss order, he notices s&p's Lurch lower on a huge volume surge he puts on his headset and fires up the S&P squawk to see what's going on.  The announcer's voice is strained. As he narrates an unexplained fall in stocks from 11:50 to 11:20 Dian skips through 91 and the Trader's, pnl, shrinks to 2 million  He tries to sell at 9080 in whiffs.  Delian is suddenly in freefall 9010 trades. 90 o brakes. Dolan has just dropped more than 4% in a few hours, a month to move.  The Trader's eyes flick over to his p&l which has now shrunk back to 6 digits.  2/3 of 3 days work Gone in 60 Seconds.  And then stocks sell off. Tired out of nowhere like really hard. The S&P squat guy is losing it screaming 1100 breaks in the S&P 1080 1070. 1060 dollar yen is a waterfall.  The S&P squat guy is losing his mind. Here's a little example of the S&P Squawk on that day.  The trading, at least 7, even felt strangely 6 feet and start trading 85, even start trading here. Now guys, all the way back and the story even start trading, all guys, 82, even start trading paper, comes in a big seller and he won't even start trading him on a 79 trading. You got 79 trading him. Once again, 788 charts. Really 6 is our Trading 36 even start trading and I got 75 even start trading 4 leaves. We even start trading at 2  Trading.  Big time. Even thinking about at 72 in an offer 68. Even dark Trading.  Delian breaks 89 0, the trader still has sold only 23 million, leaving him stuck with a position of 77 million us. It's a fast Market, nearly impossible to transact. He picks up a phone to 2 different banks and no 1 answers.  He tries to hit the 8860 bit and gets a reject notice from the aggregator.  The price feed is stale and cross. Now, it shows 89 figure bid 8810 offered which is not possible. The trader is now, down on the day in the red, his face is hot and feels read like his p&l.  Urge to slam fist on desk is rising the trade. Feels like he's falling falling in cinematic slow-mo.  At this point, stocks are down almost 10% in 1 day on, no news. Nobody knows what the hell is going on and there's panic in the air.  The squawk dude continues to scream, he's pouring gasoline on the Trader's, agitation the Trader's pnl is now 6 figures in the red.  Sadness anger.  He's furious with himself. He had the right trade. Waited, patiently, for almost 3 days, for it. To work caught, the move perfectly, according to plan.  And then flip the other way on a whim for no reason and gave everything and more back in half an hour.  2.8 million is a good month for this Trader. He just made and lost that much. In less than 2 hours.  I am an idiot. How did I get into this mess?  He needs to make a decision here and quick, but he realizes he's flooded.  It's impossible to make a good trading decision when you're flooded. He needs a second to clear his mind. He tears off the headphones. Drops them on Desk and stands up.  He walks over to the window and tries to find a moment of lucid calm.  He's been through these emotional storms before and knows how to get back to shore.  He stares over the Waters of the Long Island Sound gradually, his heart rate lowers Clarity slowly slowly returns.  His lizard brain Retreats and his rational line takes over. He talks to himself.  Does it matter how you got here? What are you going to do about it? 88 figure was a low in March, it's a massive level. The panic's Fading Dianne's down 700 points in 2 days. Now, bonds are reversing lower. This is a place to buy dollar Yen. Not so,  He returns to his keyboard. Puts his headphones, back on a squat, guys. Stop screaming. He's noticeably more composed. S&P, futures are bottomed within a whisker of limit down. They're stable but have not rebounded significantly, the bid offers super wide so it's hard to tell whether they're moving higher or just bouncing along the bottom.  The tra. Looks around the room and sees the panic and electricity levels have dropped. Not as many phones are ringing voices in the room are no longer frantic. He buys 50 million yen at 88.85. Another 73 million at 88.95 Max long now. Long 200 million dollar yen.  But this time it's thought out not random and he feels good about what he's doing.  He feels confident but fully in control.  He calmly thinks forward, Dorian could easily rallied in 9250 from here. When you catch a turn like this, you got to be greedy.  He leaves his stop loss for half his position. So hundred million dollar Yen at 87.94.  Then sits back to let things play out. He has his plan and now he knows all he can do is watch and see if it works. There's 1 more frenetic. Whipsaw Delian briefly prints too, low of 87.95 1 pip from his hundred million dollar stop-loss, amazing luck.  Seconds later. Stuck stabilized. And And then it's like everyone realizes all at once. Whatever the heck just happened, it's over.  Dianne paid at 8870 up through 8950, it breaks 90. Oh, and as it hits 90.40, the trader flicks, his eyes to the p&l. It's almost exactly back to the level where it peaked earlier. 2.8 million. He praises the trading, gods and squares out. Nice.  Too bad, he didn't stick with his plan on the way back up. Either a few hours later, Diane hit the Trader's, original Target of 9250.  In the PDF attachment. There are some charts that will show you in detail, what happened that day. And throughout the book, I'll refer to the charts but I'm also going to try to make this so you don't ever have to worry about the charts.  Personally, I find when I'm listening to an audio book, the last thing I want to do is flip to a bunch of PDFs, especially since I'm usually driving. So I'm going to try to explain the charts without making it too boring. And I don't want you trying to flip through a bunch of PDFs while you're going 75 miles an hour on the interstate or 100 miles an hour on the ottoman or wherever you're driving.  The relevant charts of dollar Yen for this story are Figure 1 and figure 2.  The trader made a multitude of both good and bad decisions in the 3 hours around the 2010. Flash crash the trading. Described in this story is a microcosm of everything that can go right and wrong in trading.  Traders make good careful decisions and get rewarded. They make bad decisions and get punished but then sometimes a good decision leads to a bad outcome or bad decision is rescued by good luck.  Every Trader is a steaming hot bowl of biased stew and must maintain self-awareness and lucidity behind the screens as the trading day, oscillates between boredom and Terror.  That story of the 2010 flash crash. Just like this book is all about the Razer thin line that Separate success to failure in trading.  Alpha Trader is written to help you understand markets, but also more importantly to help you better understand yourself as a Trader.  It's about great decisions and dumb mistakes. It's about how to be rational and why smart people do stupid things all the time.  The book is written for Traders at every skill level. I wrote it to be understood by noobs, but I also aim to write something that will resonate with experienced trading professionals.  Alpha Traders are smart rational, disciplined flexible, patient and aggressive.  They have the endurance to handle, unending dips UPS Downs, Hills and Valleys. They come in, fired up each day to solve the ultimate puzzle, and they get paid an incredibly. Well, if they succeed,  Alpha Traders work hard. Even when they don't feel like it seek to continuously improve and love markets more than they love money.  Thanks for taking the time to listen to this book. I hope you find it. Entertaining and useful. I hope it helps you unlock your maximum trading potential.  Without further Ado, let's go.  Alpha adjective, the strongest smartest, highest ranking members of a group.  Alpha noun.  Abnormal returns in investing or trading the edge of a strategy in excess of the broad Market or Benchmark return.  Introduction.  Trading is a complex chaotic Loosely structured game played by the smartest minds and most expensive computers in the world. It's the ultimate puzzle.  Few can trade at an elite level for an extended period. The game is constantly changing and the rules mechanics. And probabilities are difficult to observe and forever in flux.  Just when you think you've got a plan, bam. You get punched in the mouth.  Trading is hard.  Many people do not have the skills or knowledge to consistently make money.  Those who do have the skills, often cannot monetize them because they're irrational and poorly disciplined.  Markets are like a giant Battlefield crawling with heavily armed, humans and cyborgs, all searching for and fighting over scattered chunks of gold. High-speed ultra competitive, trading, attracts intelligent driven individuals who see enormous Financial rules and few barriers to entry.  But no amount of intelligence or skill is enough if you are irrational and disciplined or overconfident.  The best analysis is useless. If you can't resist the urge to self-destruct from the 20s. Something professional poker player who trades momentum stocks in the back of a casino between tournaments to the grizzled. 60 year old industry veteran launching a new systematic strategy out of a Sleek glass building in bucala Connecticut Everyone's battling for a slice of the same finite, pie.  How does a tiny group of Traders say on top and profit year after year While most fail?  How do you excel in this high-stakes competition? How do you unleash the alpha?  The answer is mindset methodology and math.  This audio book is for Traders of every skill and experience level. The kid who just opened a Robin Hood account with the hundred dollars of birthday money faces. Many of the same challenges and psychological hurdles as the veteran portfolio manager. Running billions of dollars of currency risk for London asset management firm. I've been trading managing other trainers and mentoring for 25 years, but I still make mistakes all the time.  Plugging leagues building on strengths and neutralizing, weaknesses is a lifelong battle.  To write this book. I sifted through thousands of pages of academic research, talked to dozens of Veteran Traders and dug through 25 years of my own memories and experience. All in an effort to define the ideal Trader. No 1 can achieve trading Perfection that's not the goal to achieve. Excellent. So we must first identify what Perfection looks like then head in that direction.  This is not a behavioral economics, textbook. And it's not a boring theoretical, Deep, dive into trading psychology.  It's a practical guide full of actionable information. Concisely distilled research, exciting and relevant trading floor stories and real life. Examples that explain and reinforce critical Concepts.  Trading, involves a deeply personal journey of struggle, continuous adaptation, and self-improvement.  the journey never ends because whenever you think you've almost mastered the game, the game changes  No book, can fully describe the individual path that each Trader will follow.  So, take what resonates for you and reject, what does not?  I am not all knowing this book, documents, the thinking of 1 person.  What works for me is not guaranteed. Need to work for you as Bruce. Lee said, research your own experience. Absorb what is useful reject? What is useless and add? What is essentially your own?  Alpha Trader will help you take an honest. Look at yourself and help you identify your strengths weaknesses and Edge. The book will explain how a rational behavior and bias are Trader. Kryptonite, it will teach you specific rules, realistic techniques, and practical habits that will help you evolve into a more successful and profitable Trader.  Be rational and self-aware, learn improve and grow. Unleash the alpha.  My goal is to keep this book as Punchy and practical as possible. Here's how it's structured.  Part 1 digs into the equation, that determines success, or failure in trading.  I review the research and my own experience and try to find the general equation for trading success. When you read part 1, think about where you match up or diverge from the alpha Trader Pro, File.  This section is a short. Look at the general recipe for Success before we dig into this specific ingredients.  Part 2 goes into more depth as I unpack, the specific qualities of winning and losing Traders.  I hope you'll Identify some of these winning trades and Kryptonite in your own character and learn from the strategies I present to build on strengths and iron out weaknesses.  Part 2 ends with the look at how smart people do stupid things and provides a ton of examples and perspective on Trader bias.  Part 3 is the most fun. There will talk about how to become an expert in your product, and how to achieve sustainable, long-term professional trading success. We dig deep into topics like microstructure Market narrative, technical analysis, sentiment, and positioning self-discipline and risk management. Then we spend a chapter bringing it all together with a detailed walkthrough of a real trade giving you a direct look into my thought, process from start to finish by the end of part 3, you'll Have a detailed knowledge of how I structure trades and you can use that knowledge to develop or approve, your own methodology.  Finally, part 4 is all about healthy mindset there. I write about how you can adapt and continuously improve with a focus on self-awareness perspective and metacognition.  All right, that's an overview of how the book is structured. Let's go.  Part 1. Why do some Traders succeed? But most fail part 1's. A quick look at success in general and at 6 in trading more specifically we start with a look inward as I asked you to evaluate yourself and establish a baseline of your current strengths and weaknesses as a Trader.  In Chapter 2, we look at how incredibly difficult it is. To achieve lasting trading success chapter 3 is a scan of the research on success in the world outside of trading. Then in chapter 4, we take this information and study the research on trading to solve for the More specific equation of trading success.  As you listened to part 1, think about where you match up or diverge from the alpha Trader profile and take notes. The point of part 1 is to study understand and Define the factors that lead to trading success. Then start an iterative process where you repeatedly learn plan, execute, analyze and improve to get there.  Chapter 1, know yourself.  Good Traders are introspective and self-aware.  In trading, the enemy is not bad luck, it's not other Traders or the market.  the enemy is not the algo or the central banks or the gold bugs for sales or your manager or the hodlers or dayport noi or quantitative easing when it comes to trading Enemy Number 1 is you  As sensu once said, Know The Enemy and know yourself. I like that. Sunsu quote, for chapter 1 of a book about trading because it has a cool circularity in trading, the enemy and the self are 1.  You will not succeed in trading without self-awareness and discipline.  The biggest challenge in trading is not choosing what asset class to trade, or when to buy and sell or what percentage of your Capital to risk on each trade.  The biggest challenge in trading is to manage yourself.  Your bundle of emotions memories, history, knowledge and bias. You can be smart and do stupid things. You can make a hard job Impossible by making irrational and compulsive decisions.  The first step toward becoming, a better Trader is to get a firm handle on who you are right now.  Therefore, before we delve into what makes a successful Trader, I want you to complete a quick quiz.  It will help you set a personal Baseline and take an inventory of your attributes. It'll give you a snapshot of how you see yourself as a Trader before we jump in. Now I said earlier when I listened to an audiobook I don't like to have to worry about a bunch of PDFs and stuff but I would strongly suggest you complete this questionnaire.  To get the PDF that accompanies this book for free. Go to www.spectra.com. That's s p. E c t r. A markets.com alpha Trader.  That's Spectrum. Markets.com. Alpha Trader.  Alpha Trader, all 1 Word no spaces or punctuation completing that questionnaire in the PDF is 1 of the most important parts of the book because it really helps you narrow in on who you are, where you stand, what's good about your trading, what's bad about it? So you really need to complete this questionnaire. I know it's a pain in the butt, but just do it anyway, don't be lazy.  you'll find the trader self assessment at the very start of The PDF the trader self assessment, looks at many different personality traits such as how risk-seeking you are, how confident you are intellectual flexibility contrarianism impulsiveness ability to cope with stress, all kinds of stuff like that. I'm not going to go through them all because that would be really boring.  But it is important to complete the assessment and see where you stand on each continuum.  Now, let's look at the ideal Trader and keep in mind, this ideal Trader does not exist.  It's an abstraction to help you see where you are versus the ideal. Also, keep in mind that I'm not the holder of absolute truth on this topic, I have Decades of experience and I've done extensive research on the topic but it is possible for reasonable people to disagree about the importance of many of these personality traits as they pertain to trading success.  The research is not conclusive. In fact, it's often contradictory, for example, the research on the importance of gut feel and trading is All over the place.  Much of it. Uses experiments with small sample sizes to make General, but unconvincing conclusions.  Some of it uses methodology that I find uninspired, the fact that the research on gut feel in trading is mixed, probably tells you something about the relative importance of gut, feel, unlike rational thinking, which all research teams to be critically important gut feel is less. Clearly, an important part of trading success.  In fact, relying on your gut cut off to be detrimental, it can be the aggregation of data and patterns process data. Subconscious level to reach useful conclusions or it can be a bunch of sloppy heroics and emotion that produces biased irrational decisions.  After working on various trading, floors for many years, and studying the research on Trader, success and failure. I created my best estimates for the ideal characteristics of the alpha Trader. And I include those right after the self assessment in the PDF.  Again, it's really Useful. If you do these self assessment and then look at the ideal Trader, self assessment in the PDF and I promise you won't have to go to the PDF. Again, if you don't want to  How does your self assessment match up to the alpha Trader? Where do your scores? Diverge  Does this Divergence concern you? Or does it make perfect sense? Some divergences might be worrisome and some might just identify how you are unique. Remember this is a thought experiment, not a math problem.  Each trait will be discussed more fully later on. So I won't take a ton of time explaining here, but I want to give you a rough outline of the characteristics that are described in the questionnaire.  Each characteristic runs on a spectrum and is labeled with the letter.  A risk averse to risk-seeking.  Risk-seeking is a natural fit for trading but too much leads to recklessness and ruin B.  Not very confident to extremely confident.  confidence is good, but overconfidence is Kryptonite.  C firmly held opinions to extremely intellectually flexible.  Strong opinions. Weakly held is the way. If you don't know this concept don't worry. We'll cover it in chapter 5.  D contrarian or tends to follow others?  You need to think for yourself but not reflexively. Go against the crowd. The crowd is correct more often and for longer than many contrarians, expect  E, impulsive to rational.  Rational high quality thinking is the number 1 characteristic of an alpha Trader.  F can snap under stress to copes, well with high stress.  Trading. The stressful, can you handle it?  G, poor self-control to excellent willpower self-control willpower, our critical making rules as easy sticking to them as hard.  H average amount skill to quantitative Superstar trading is a quantitative game full of estimated probability hit. Mathematics and incomplete information, math and statistics knowledge are a huge Edge.  I procrastinated to doerr.  Trading is hard, simply doing the work is a big advantage in a world where even professional Traders can sometimes be lazy.  J. Loves money to loves Trading.  A passion for trading is the motivation that will lead you to success. Not a passion for money. Trading is too hard and too grueling to do just for the money.  K. Axone gut feel to axle logic logic, trumps gut, feel most of the time.  L, rarely positive to always positive, losing streaks and big losses hurt, the positive attitude helps you balance. Back when you inevitably hit a rough patch,  a negative outlook can pull you into a downward spiral, when markets inevitably fail to cooperate, M, lucky to unlucky.  Good Traders seem to be luckier than bad Traders. Moon, n Limitless energy to often exhausted.  Trading is a marathon. You need endurance to keep running.  Oh, highly creative to average imagination. 1 Edge in markets, is to look at the world differently than others, but if you're extremely creative, you may find that trading is not a good enough outlet for that creativity.  P. I control my life to I don't control my life.  The trading gods are not pushing the market against you. The more you believe that you are in control of your life, the better your odds of trading success Q. Decisive to hesitate.  Traders need to be decisive, but Extreme decisiveness May border on impulsiveness and that can lead to overconfidence and over Trading.  Our adapts well to change to not upgrade with change.  Adapt or die.  Markets are always changing. Can you keep up?  S Focus to scattered trading in the zone requires. Focus. But you need to be able to multitask a bit as well singular. Focus is not usually possible in trading. As you must toggle between various markets reading research, monitoring Twitter and actual trading activity.  T, always very curious to note all that curious.  Curiosity leads to learning learning makes you more knowledgeable. Superior knowledge is an edge.  You organize versus disorganized, an organized Trader has a clear process. She collects data and approaches the task of trading methodically. That's a good thing.  V trading. Experience versus no trading experience, nothing beats experience. If you never make the same mistake twice, you won't make many mistakes after 20 years.  W, highly emotional to robotic.  Emotion is not a good or bad thing in trading, all kinds of emotional types can succeed in finance.  That said emotion and irrational Behavior tend to go. Together. So if you're emotionally, you need to be unusually self-aware too.  X loader to social.  There are some advantages to having a network of contacts, but a Trader can easily succeed completely on his own.  Why masculine to feminine?  A wide body of research shows women, perform better at trading than men.  This is mostly because men trade more than women due to overconfidence and overtrading is a major leak.  Is z or Zed introvert to extrovert?  Extroverts and introverts might have different styles, but neither 1 is better or worse at Trading.  Your scores on the quiz. Should take you 1 small, or perhaps medium-sized, step closer to self-awareness. Self-care comes from experience and from data, but it can also come from focused introspection.  Keep in mind that you are probably overconfident in your self-assessment, whatever grades you gave yourself. Are probably somewhat inflated relative to reality because human beings pretty much always overate themselves.  In a survey, I conducted in 2016, for example, 70% of Traders said they were above average, while just 5% rated themselves worse than average not possible. You're almost certainly not quite as good as you think you are.  Men are especially prone to overconfidence.  But even if you overrated, yourself on every positive variable in the quiz, the relative distinctions you make between traits, not the absolute numbers. You assign are the most important thing.  This will reveal your strengths, expose some weaknesses and help you find avenues for continuous Improvement. The harsh reality of trading is that it is insanely difficult but not impossible to succeed.  If you've been trading for a while, you have a good sense of the enormous challenge presented by trading. If you're new here, I want to give you a realistic view of the success rate.  Success. Trading is only possible for a small group of individuals, but those individuals are rewarded with an incredible adventure and extraordinary Financial upside.  The more worthwhile and lucrative a goal is in this world. The harder, the achievement of that goal is likely to be trading. Certainly fits that relationship. It's a business with an extremely high level of difficulty, but massive reward potential.  Now, that you've taken a few minutes to think about your Trader personality. Let's head to chapter 2 and look at just how difficult it is to achieve persistent trading success.  Chapter 2. If it was easy, it wouldn't pay so well.  Research shows, success, in trading is hard to achieve and harder to sustain.  Trading for a living is like, becoming a pro-athlete or a famous author or professional poker player. There are few barriers to entry and no specific credentials are Required and the financial rewards are potentially astronomical. Anyone can dream of making a big in these fields, but only a tiny fraction of those who go after the dream will succeed at any point and even smaller fraction will achieve sustained success over many decades.  the goal of this book is to help you become 1 of the very few who thrives and survives  Intelligence and drive are the keys to success in most business Pursuits, but this is not strictly true in trading intelligence and drive are necessary, but not sufficient conditions for trading success.  Many people think of trading as a zero-sum game and that makes them feel optimistic.  Since almost, everyone believes themselves to be better than average in almost all Pursuits. The thought is that if something is a zero sum game, all you have to do is be better than the next guy to win, right? Wrong.  Trading is a negative sum game.  When I was day, trading, equities, most Traders were gross positive and net negative. Most periods. They could take money out of the market, but not enough to cover their brokerage bid offer spread and other slippage.  Transaction costs. And slippage are a significant drag for Traders at every level.  Therefore, you need a significant Edge to not only make money, but also to make enough money to exceed execution, technology and operational costs.  Further grinding out, tiny profits, still isn't enough. There's so much risk and uncertainty involved in trading that for it to make any sense. You need to significantly exceed the income, you can make in a lower risk profession. The bar for success in trading is high.  What percentage of Traders succeed?  The word succeed can mean many things of course, but based on various metrics my conclusion from the research and my own observation over the years is that the success rate for independent day Traders is probably between 3% and 5% for institutional Traders. The success rate is much much higher because As 1, there are many barriers to entry that 1 must overcome before earning a role on an Institutional trading desk. So the pool of entrance is much more highly qualified and well vetted that a random selection of independent Traders.  2 Traders at a bank, receive significant training and are surrounded by experienced mentors. And 3 market-making has a built-in Edge, which gives new Traders at a bank more Runway.  In my experience of all, the individuals who manage to get 1 of the few trading seats of available at a bank about 50% succeed, as Traders. I Define succeed as still employed and profitable, 3 years after starting  for Traders at a hedge fund. The success rate is higher than retail but lower than Bank Traders. Most hedge funds don't have a labor of training programs or the edge for Market making the banks do. But most Traders hired by hedge funds already have substantial experience. So the sample is biased, you're usually already Successful, by the time you get a job at a hedge fund, Corey Mitchell of day. Trading firm Vantage Point trading wrote a nice blog post on this topic. He defined success as producing consistent profits for multiple years and after studying a meaningful sample size, he estimated The observed success rate at vantage point was between 3.5% and 4.5%.  When I worked as a day trader, in Toronto in the late 1990s, the success rate was about the same. I sat on a trading floor that held 50 people and almost the entire floor turned over 3 times in the 3 years I was there  Anyone that lasted, I got to know, well, because we spent so much time together in the office.  Of the 150 traders that came and went 8. Made money consistently for 2 years or more most bummed out in 3, to 6 months and the remainder struggled for 1 or 2 years, but could never grind out enough money to call it a job.  8 out of 150 is 5.3% and that low success rate came to By the mandatory and excellent 2-e, training course.  The low success rate makes sense, it's roughly consistent with success rates, in other sought-after, skill-based professions with low barriers to entry, such as fiction writing and pro sports. About 2.6% of published books, sell more than 5,000 copies 3, to 7% of high school athletes make the NCAA most sports. While that 2% of NCAA, athletes Go Pro.  If you're new to trading, you need to understand going in that the success rate is low.  You'll need a 10-minute a skill, the energy to work hard every single day and rare levels of perseverance to have any chance whatsoever. It's not a matter of flicking through a few charts drawing a couple of trend lines or using some automated charting or chart chart, chart power indicator,  Brad Barber studied this topic in a 2017 research paper. Do individual day Traders. Make money evidence from Taiwan.  Day trading was extremely popular in Taiwan in the late 1990s. As it was in many other countries, 20% of all trading volume in Taiwanese stopped at that time was attributable to individual day Traders.  Here are the takeaways from their study, 1% of individual investors. Accounted for half of day trading, volume in Taiwan,  Heavy day traders made gross profits but not enough to cover transaction costs and thus, they were net, negative p&l.  Over any particular 6-month period, 8 out of 10 day Traders lost money.  A small group of day Traders, had persisted ability to generate net profit in excess of transaction costs.  Many Traders sustained losses for long periods before quitting.  And finally about 1% of Traders generated, consistent profits through skill, this quote, from an article about the study captures. The long odds, they uncovered  Quote.  the best vast majority of day Traders were losing money, unless you really had a strong reason to think that your ability to day trade was Much greater than that of most people. It made no sense to start day trading in the first place, and be like to some extent going into a casino and saying, I'm really good at roulette even though I know everyone else loses money at roulette, I'm going to win.  Unquote.  For the record. Professional investors have a very low success rate too.  Here's a typical stat from a January 2020. Financial Times article, quote just 28% of us, Equity Fund managers investing in large companies. Managed to be the US Stock Market last year and over the past decade, Amir 11% managed to do. So, according to Bank of America, end, quote,  This result emerges in study after study a random group of unskilled investors should be the market, 50% of the time, it is a significant majority of investors, consistently underperform a simple index or benchmark.  Solving for how to generate Alpha in highly, efficient markets is 1 of the toughest puzzles on Earth. Markets are extremely but not perfectly efficient, knowing that success in trading is rare. Let's look at how to achieve it. The next chapter is a short discussion of the research on success in general.  Then in chapter 4, we'll apply these lessons about achievement in general to the more specific subject of trading success.  Chapter 3, understanding success.  Success and high performance in the world outside of trading.  This short chapter will give you some background on the main determinant of success in the world, in general outside of trading.  Since trading is both a business and a skilled Pursuit. It's worth doing a quick review of what leads to success in similar Fields before we zoom in on trading more specifically in chapter 4  success is a squishy. Now that can mean different things to different people.  Most research frames. Success in terms of 1 or more of the following.  Income educational achievement ranking or achievement in sport, happiness, Health and Longevity, avoidance of negative outcomes, like criminality addiction and divorce.  we'll focus on the first 3 since those are the outcomes that relate most closely to Trading  Let's look at some measures and characteristics of personality and how they relate to success.  IQ intelligence quotient.  IQ is a controversial Topic, in the world of psychology and there's heated debate over, what exactly it measures.  This quote from the book, how to lie with statistics by Daryl Huff. Captures a few of the shortcomings of IQ, in simple language.  Quote.  Just to clear the air. Let's note first that, whatever an intelligence test measures, it is not quite the same thing. As we usually mean by intelligence. It neglects such important things as leadership. Creative imagination.  It takes no account of social judgement, or musical or artistic or other aptitudes to say, nothing of such personality matters as diligence and emotional balance, end quote.  There's plenty of controversy when researchers try to correlate IQ with various measures of success. It's hard to control for all the other factors that go into whenever form of success, 1 is trying to measure  that said, most research funds settling between IQ and success. For example, an excellent paper by J, is ackee a Boston University comes to this conclusion.  Quote.  Results. Confirm other researchers findings that IQ test scores and income are related, depending on the method of analysis used and specific factors held constant each point. Increase in IQ test scores is associated with 202 to 616 more income per year.  This means the average income difference. Between a person with an IQ score and the normal range of 100 and someone in the top, 2% of society at 1:30, is currently between 6,000 and 18,500 per year end quote.  At figure 4 in the PDF shows the relationship between IQ and income using 10 years of data. It's a very scattered scatterplot and there is a loose relationship there, but it's not super tight.  The relationship slopes up into the right and the very high incomes are much more common in the top right quadrant than in the top left. So for defining success, as income. IQ is an important predictor.  Figure 5 in the PDF breaks IQ into 3 groups, low middle and high to show how the median and right tails of the income distribution relate to IQ.  It's pretty easy to see higher IQs make more money IQ. Also correlates with most other measures of success like mortality longevity. Prime and obviously academic grades.  Figure 6 in the PDF shows, a scatter plot of academic grades versus IQ and it's pretty much a 45 degree, angle from bottom, left to top, right?  But there's tons and tons of variance around the trend line.  I included this chart of IQ versus academic grades to show that even a measure of success directly connected to IQ doing well. In school. Still has significant volatility around the trend line. There are plenty of high IQ students with poor grades and low IQ students with good grades academic success. Depends on far, more than intelligence after IQ. The next Big Driver of success is personality. There's so much research on the connections between personality and life outcomes. That no, individual could process at all in 1 lifetime,  In the next few minutes, I'll do my best to succinctly summarize. Some of the key relationships between personnel. And success.  The Big 5.  Most studies of personality and its impact on life outcomes. Use the Big 5 personality traits. These are the 5 personality traits that dominate the literature on personality.  The 5 traits use common language, descriptors to classify people of 5, key domains, these 5 domains incorporate nearly all aspects of human personality and extensive research shows that these 5 factors explain the majority of human character. The model is sometimes known as ocean because the 5 are oh, openness to experience.  C. Conscientiousness e, extraversion a agreeableness, an end neuroticism.  The Big 5 is better than Meyers Briggs, or mbti according to nearly all researchers in psychologists, because its scientific and repeatable in contrast Meyers Briggs was created. In the 1920s by non-experts without any scientific process or empirical inputs.  Myersbriggs.org span of time.  Myersbriggs.org scientific basis.  As Warren psychology Professor. Adam Grant says it is psychology today article. Goodbye to mbti The Fad that won't die.  Quote, if we're going to divide people into categories, those categories ought to be meaningful in social science. We use 4 standards are the categories. Reliable valid independent and comprehensive.  For the mbti, the evidence says not vary. No, no, and not really end quote.  Scientists and experts strongly prefer the Big 5 to myersbriggs.org.  Each Big 5 trait runs on a continuum. The 5 trades capture most or all aspects of human personality. And there are many facets or more specific traits that fall under each heading.  Some of these trades are more relevant to us than others. For example I want to highlight grit and self-control as critical facets Under The Heading of conscientiousness because those are important in trading.  Grit captures characteristics like perseverance resilience ambition and the pursuit of long-term goals.  Multiple studies show that grit is highly correlated with conscientiousness. So it falls under that heading and I think it's specifically important to trading and thus worth mentioning separately. Same story with self-control which has a lower correlation with conscientiousness than grit but still falls in the same bucket. We'll discuss those more later.  Most research shows that the Big 5 trades are fairly stable over a person's lifetime. There's just 1 trait that changes significantly over the lifetime of an average person conscientiousness. There's a steady and meaningful rise in conscientiousness as we age figure 7, shows. A line that goes down from age, 10 to 15. Then grinds slowly up from age, 15, all the way to the end of your life.  And the chart is conscientiousness by age.  Remember though, that's an average averages camouflage, the substantial variance within a sample.  Coochie just evolves differently in specific individuals over time. Some people will massively increase their cognitions. This as they grow, some will flat-line their entire life or even become less conscientious.  Untangling the connections between the Big 5. Traits and future success is incredibly complex because of the need to control for. So many other factors, parental income birthplace sex, education cross-correlation between the traits themselves and so on. But the multitude of studies on the Big 5 Converge on some consistent conclusions. The Big 5 and financial success.  Income has a strong positive correlation with conscientiousness and extraversion. It has a weak negative relationship with agreeableness and neuroticism.  Openness results, look inconclusive to me as they have a negative coefficient in some studies and a positive coefficient in others.  Figure 8 in the PDF shows how the Big 5 influence men's incomes by age.  And the main takeaway is that conscientiousness and extroversion are extremely important in your 30s, and 40s and are highly correlated to income as 1. Might expect neuroticism correlates with many negative outcomes, including lower income, higher, incidence of mental disorder, and general health problems.  But also note that the negative impact of neuroticism on income is not large.  Agreeableness, perhaps surprisingly shows up, in more than a half dozen research papers as a negative influence on income. It consistently reduces average earnings by 2 26% being nice doesn't pay.  Besides the simple linear relationship between personality and income, the fit between a job and the personality of the employee. Also matters. Linear regression gives a Brute Force. Look at how personality influences income but a more nuanced approach is to match a worker's personality to an expert's views of what personality traits are necessary in that person's job.  Research shows that a good fit between a person and their job leads to higher income for the worker. This last observation is important when we think about trading knowing that job, personality fit is an important driver of income. We'll spend some time in chapter 4 looking at how the Big 5 relate to trading success  this will help you understand if your personality is a good fit with trading and where you might need to monitor a potential personality mismatch  To summarize here's how the Big 5 personality traits relate to income, openness, no correlation conscientiousness. Strong positive.  Extroversion, small positive agreeableness moderate, negative neuroticism, small negative.  Obviously income is just 1 way to measure success. Let's look at 2 others.  Success in sports.  Athletic competition is similar to trading in many ways Sports and trading, both present, fast-moving high-pressure environments with quick decision-making and usually in complete information.  They present a competitive atmosphere with well-defined rules objective, numerical feedback, and clear winners and losers in sport, the trade that consistently correlates with high performance is once again, koia Justice, this finding is consistent across many papers and pushes conscientiousness to the top of the charts in terms of our best, guess of what might matter for trading at this point.  if conscientiousness leads to higher income and better performance in sports, is logical to think of Matters for trading too.  Academic success.  Academic environments. Also have some similarity to trading school and trading. Both generally present intellectually challenging problem solving environments, where feedback is immediate and objective.  Academic grades equals pnl.  Once again, the number 1 trade, that correlates with academic performance is Kia, just this? And once again, neuroticism correlates negatively.  It's worth mentioning here that academic grades and test scores are a better predictor of career and social success than IQ.  This is because outcomes like grades and test scores are a combination of not just intelligence but also hard work, conscientiousness grit, self-control and perseverance.  Intelligence is a necessary, but not sufficient condition for good grades. High test scores and future success IQ by itself is not enough.  Well, the Big 5 also have some predict Power when it comes to happiness health mortality, divorce criminality and other facets of Life. Those Realms are not measures of success that are as relevant to trading. We know how the Big 5 predict income Sports Performance and academic success, 3 outcomes that I believe are correlated to trading success.  So far, the overall results are clear.  Conscientiousness is the most important positive predictor of success. IQ is also an important positive. Predictor neuroticism is a less important negative predictor of success.  Of course, we've only lived at innate traits so far. Another way of looking at success is to isolate effort or hard work. Most research on performance breaks down success into some combination of talent skill and effort. You can't just be smart and talented. You need to do the work.  We'll go into that concept later, but for now, we can file effort under conscientiousness.  Another important variable when it comes to success. Is environment kids that grow up in support of environments, like athletes with world class coaches, perform better.  This is relevant to trading too and we'll discuss the importance of a healthy trading environment later on.  I've been in both the right trading environment and the wrong trading environment at various points in my career. And my belief is that trading is so difficult that it becomes almost impossible if you're not in a supportive setting.  Finally luck is an extremely important contributor to success in any specific activity. And in life overall, many successful people do not fully appreciate or acknowledge the significant role luck played in their success.  As EB, white put it quote.  Luck is not something you can mention in the presence of self-made, men, unquote.  Some examples of how luck influences success.  1 more than 50% of the difference in income between any human being on Earth. Is determined by where they were born.  As War Buffett put it quote through de Charlie and I were born in the United States and we are forever grateful for the Staggering advantages, the accident of birth has given us end quote.  2 people born in June and July are significantly, less likely to become CEOs, due to their relative age effect.  Schools group children together by age, regardless of their birth month and the cutoff for most schools is July 31.  Therefore, children more than June and July are disadvantaged through life because they are younger than their classmates, born in other months and are perceived to be less mature, less intelligent and lower potential than their peers.  3. How about this? Completely insane. True story from the early days of Federal Express quote by mid July. Our funds were so meager than on Friday. We were down to about 5 thousand dollars in the checking account, but we needed 24,000 for the jet fuel payment. when I arrived back in Memphis on Monday, morning much to my surprise, the bank balance stood at nearly 32,000  I asked Fred where the funds had come from and he responded the meeting with the General Dynamics, board was a bust. I knew we needed money for Monday. So I took a plane to Las Vegas and won 27,000 plane blackjack  I said you mean, you took our last 5,000, how could you do that? He Shrugged, his shoulders and said, what difference does it make? Without the funds for the fuel companies? We couldn't have flown anyway, and quote.  For.  People born earlier in the year, outperformed those born later in the year in almost every sport where this has been studied.  Figure 9 is a completely ridiculous chart that shows the month of birth distribution for players and qualifying teams for UEFA soccer in 2010 and 2011.  It shows what percentage of elite soccer players were born in each month and it goes in a perfectly straight line. With January, the highest bar. February next. Highest March, April. All the way down to December, being the smallest bar.  It's the same thing in the NHL.  Kids born in January, February and March look bigger stronger and more talented than kids born in October November and December. Think about that. 9-month difference at age 6 or 7? It's a completely different child.  Many simulations and studies show that luck plays an enormous role in success, especially in cases, of extreme success. While moderate success, can often be explained mostly by skill, effort, and talent extreme success. Usually, also requires significant, good luck. While you cannot control luck, remember that effort and skill, determine the slope of your life's path. Even if luck, determines the starting point and variance around that path. As Abraham Lincoln said the harder I work, the luckier I get  We'll discuss this more in chapter 15 and you'll see that some of what we tend to call luck. Is more just Just a matter of being observant and seizing on opportunities, that present themselves.  Fortunately, most varieties of luck are short-term and mean reverting the larger, the sample, the more luck disappears and the true nature of a phenomenon is revealed. The coin might come up heads 10 times in a row but it's not going to come up. Heads 500,000 times in a row, a bad Trader might make money 3 days in a row, but she's unlikely to be profitable in any given year.  A weak poker player might be to professional in a 1-hour session, but he'll go bust in a marathon cash game.  This discussion is important because luck plays a major role in trading. It operates through multiple channels like short-term, variance and path, dependence.  In the flash crash story at the start of this book, there were multiple instances where the trader got lucky. And if you reran that flash crash dollar Yen scenario, a million times, there'd be plenty of instances where the trader came out, deep in the red.  what seems like luck a life is often just Careful, observation and the ability to capitalize on opportunity.  Richard Wiseman, who spent years? Researching luck set up a variety of interesting experiments to show that luck. Is not really luck.  In 1 experiment, he placed a twenty dollar bill on the ground in the path of students and found that those that self-identified as lucky were much more likely to notice and pick up the twenty-dollar bill than the others.  In another study Wiseman, gave volunteers a newspaper and told them to count the number of photos inside.  On the second page in large font, there was a box that said stop counting. There are 43 photographs in this newspaper. Another box halfway through the paper red, stop counting tell the experiment you've seen this and when 250  Those who identify as lucky took just seconds to return their answer. While those who viewed themselves as unlucky spent more than 2 minutes counting all the photos  Other studies revealed. The same thing. What we proceed? As luck is often just a combination of good observation skill and the ability to seize unexpected opportunities.  It's crucial that. You understand the way luck, influences training, and how you can manage and reduce the negative impact of various forms of luck.  This is discussed in Chapter 11.  Conscientiousness and neuroticism.  before we move on to chapter 4, I want to talk a bit more about conscientiousness and neuroticism because they are most correlated to success in arenas related to Trading  Neuroticism leads to many negative outcomes can be broken down into these facets.  Irritability insecurity anxiety, hostility depression, self-consciousness, impulsiveness and vulnerability.  If you score high in any of those traits which are all sub traits of neuroticism, think about how you can reduce their presence or impact. Work on these negative trades is a meditation mindfulness reframing yoga. Professional Therapy, self-reflection. And other techniques neuroticism will make it harder for you to achieve your goals.  If neuroticism is Kryptonite conscientiousness is a superpower, here's a breakdown of the facets or sub traits that psychologists consider part of conscientiousness.  Orderliness order tidiness.  Industriousness hard work and energy.  Reliability responsibility.  Impulse control self-control.  Decisiveness.  Persistence and perseverance.  With the knowledge that these facets of conscientiousness are major predictors of Life. Success. Think about how you can improve in 1 or more of these areas.  this will help you not just as a Trader, but as a human being  This is especially true if you are young because conscientiousness is the trait that can most easily be boosted. Over time.  My conscientiousness score is okay but not great. I'm in the 60th percentile that said. I've put a lot of work into trying to be more organized reliable and persistent.  Over the years, I slowly learned that personality traits are not fixed. They can be molded and improved. I probably scored closer to 35 unconsciousness, when I was in my 20s, my self-control has never been great and it is still not amazing. I accept this and try to work around it. Here are a few ways you can boost your conscientiousness.  1, don't say things. Like, I'm just like that or I'm really disorganized, or that's just who I am. When it comes to conscientiousness being organized, or on time or proactive, is a choice think of your mind as plastic, not fixed.  2. Read the book willpower rediscovering. The greatest human strength by Roy bamister and John turning.  It's packed with research and anecdotes. About how to improve, not just your willpower, but your organizational skills and your metacognition.  I learned a ton of immediately applicable information from that book including how to keep my inbox empty.  It also taught me how we have a finite supply of willpower each day and thus, willpower often runs low, especially at night and the book taught me the importance of zyg loops.  3.  acknowledge your willpower is not perfect and create systems to protect yourself from this weakness, create friction in places where you engage in activities, you should not  An example of friction is when people turn off their phone, while at dinner to avoid checking it, by making it a hassle. You are less likely to perform the habitual or addictive behavior.  On the other hand, reduce friction to reinforce desirable habits. For example, if you want to get in shape, don't make yourself decide whether to work out or not each day, work out every day.  Go to bed in your workout gear. So you have 1 less step to take in the morning before. Working out.  When the decisions already made there's less friction.  In trading. This means you need to build systems and install processes that protect you from unwanted behaviors like overtrading. While working to automate desirable behaviors like stop-loss discipline.  4.  Set specific and realistic short-term action goals. Instead of saying man, I need to get in shape. Say this month I'm going to eat 0, potato chips, and work out 15 times.  5 brake long-term or difficult tasks into smaller chunks and focus on doing 1 chunk at a time.  Writing a book is daunting writing a few pages is not if you focus on writing a few pages each day, a few months later, you magically have the rough draft of a book. Same thing in trading. Try not to focus on your year to date, p&l too much. Come in each day and do your best. Each year is only around 250 trading days. Take them 1 at a time and do your very best each day. Let the year to date. Pnl, take care of itself.  6. Make lists.  Do not expect yourself to remember everything, even if you have an excellent memory, Outsource your memory to a Notes app or a piece of paper.  7 be on time.  Even if you don't care about punctuality, many people do, it's rude to show up. Late for meetings events or dinner. It's sloppy and unprofessional to submit work after a deadline, even if it doesn't bother you when others are late. Forget about your own preferences, your values around. This topic are not the most important thing. Understand that punctuality is part of becoming a more considerate thoughtful and conscientious person. It's not okay to say, that's just who I am.  8 ad to continuous Improvement mindset.  You don't need to make huge changes all the time. Instead be on the constant lookout for tiny improvements, you can make that don't require Herculean effort.  I try to do this with my daily newsletter amfs. I'll look at my charts and see if there's a way to display them a bit more clearly. I'll think of new features that might appeal to different readers. I'll ask my readers, what they like, and don't like and try to keep evolving the product through subtle improvements.  9 learn about inbox, zero, it sounds impossible at first but it's not don't be 1 of those people with 1,431 unread messages, who I have to contact 3 times before I get a reply, that is not good.  N10, turn off notifications for desktop, email, and turn off. Nearly all notifications on your phone.  You should check your email once per hour or less. It's just not that urgent.  Each pop-up. Every time you get an email is a pointless distraction and will take you out of the Zone when you're Trading.  Access your technology when it makes sense to do. So don't be a puppet controlled by your apps.  Remember that most of your traits are not fixed, you can improve and evolve, you can increase your conscientiousness over time. Conclusion.  This chapter looked at research where success is defined as high income exceptional Sports Performance or high academic achievement on these 3 measures, all of which have parallels to trading the formula is  Success equals conscientiousness plus IQ plus talent and skill plus luck minus neuroticism.  Everybody's story is different but that's the general formula for the overall population.  The weighting of each factor varies by individual and over time.  Now, let's move on to chapter 4 and see how closely success in the broader World. Parallels success in trading.  Chapter 4. So you're saying there's a chance.  Why some Traders succeed but most fail?  Warren Buffett. Once said, quote you don't need to be a rocket scientist. Investing is not a game where the guy with the 1. 60 beats the guy with the 130. IQ rationality is essential, end quote.  As you'll see in this chapter that Buffett quote applies to trading too.  There's a surprisingly, large body of academic literature on trading. It's a profession that is of Interest, not just to those in finance, but also to psychologists economists, statisticians, and sociologists  I spent weeks going through all this literature and an effort to find why some Traders succeed, but most fail.  This is not a formal review of the academic literature on trading success. It's my best effort to boil a ton of research down to a few key conclusions. I don't want to bore you with Superfluous information, so I'm going to jump, straight to the conclusion and then explain it after pouring through all the research on trading success, 2, critical traits jump out 1, rationality is the human trait that best predicts trading, success.  People who are rational and do not jump to Quick conclusions. Using mental shortcuts or historical in trading, this characteristic can be measured as rationality quotient.  2.  Overconfidence is a human trait that best predicts trading, failure people who overestimate their ability to outsmart the market perform worse.  Are you rationale? It makes a ton of sense that rational Traders outperform those who are not good Traders study, behavioral Finance because humans as a group act in predictably irrational ways and this predictable irrationality can be exploited for profit. So by extension, it seems reasonable to say that those who do not exhibit this irrationality will outperform.  Rationality can be measured with a simple, 3 question test called the cognitive reflection test or CRT.  more sophisticated tests of rationality are in development as well such as Keith's, sasnovich comprehensive assessment of rational thinking or  Well, IQ is meant to measure intelligence and EQ. Emotional quotient is meant to measure. Emotional intelligence RQ, rationality quotient measures how rational a person is.  RQ and IQ are correlated but they're not the same thing.  A new nuanced understanding of probability along with the ability to avoid jumping to the first. Most obvious, conclusion are critical mental skills possessed by someone with high RQ, but not necessarily by someone with high IQ.  Keith stanovich is at the Forefront of rationality research and he puts it this way. Quote,  it is a profound historical irony of the behavioral sciences that the Nobel Prize was awarded for studies of cognitive characteristics. Rational thinking skills that are entirely missing from the most well-known mental assessment device, in the behavioral sciences the intelligence test,  Intelligence tests measure, important things. But not these, they do not assess the extent of rational thought.  This might not be such an Omission. If it were the case that intelligence was, an exceptionally strong predictor of rational thinking, however research has found that, it is a moderate predictor at best and that sell rational, thinking skills can be quite disassociated, from intelligence, end quote,  Sasnovich and others have conducted a great deal of research on how rationality and intelligence relate. And while the 2 are correlated, there are areas where particular types of rationality are totally uncorrelated to intelligence.  For example, highly intelligent people suffer more from confirmation bias than less intelligent people. This is why experts often underperform layman in tasks, where 1 would expect the expert to outperform. Confident, experts have trouble taking in new information, if it contradicts their existing view of the world,  Here's an excerpt from an interview with stanovich.  Quote. The correlations between measures of intelligence and various tasks from the cognitive psychology literature that measure aspects of rationality are surprisingly low. We use the term surprisingly here because for many years it has been known that virtually all cognitive ability tasks correlate with each other.  Indeed many show quite High. Correlations so being psychologists, the surprise is in a context of this wide. And vast cognitive ability literature which has the technical name, spearman's positive manifold.  This positive manifold that performance on cognitive tasks tends to correlate and often quite highly is more than 100 years old. Indeed in restricted samples of educated adults, this correlation can be virtually zero on certain tasks in the literature. Most often the correlation is positive. But again, in light of a 100 Years of correlations between cognitive ability tasks, the correlations are often surprisingly low.  Of course, 1 of the implications of this. Is that it will not be uncommon to find people whose intelligence and rationality are dissociated. That is it will not be uncommon to find people with high levels of intelligence and low levels of rationality. And to some extent, the converse there are entire books written about rationality and I will cover many specific forms of bias in chapter 7. But for now we'll review a few important ways that rational thinking differs from irrational, thought,  system 1 versus system 2 thinking  the 2 systems concept was developed by Daniel Kahneman and is a major Topic in his book Thinking Fast and Slow.  System 1 Thinking Fast executes, quickly without much. Thought, it's your lizard brain tends to be biased because it relies on speed shortcuts and hissed speed. Sacrifices accuracy.  System 2 Thinking slow requires conscious effort and thought and is less biased system. 2 is more rational than system 1. Rational thinkers use system 2 more than system 1, they substitute methodical assessment for gut field.  If they use system 1, they follow up and double check with system. 2 after acting system, 1 is a crazy kid inside you system. 2 is the adult in the room.  Numeracy.  Rational thinkers understand numbers. Rational thinkers understand probability irrational, thinkers overestimate, the chance of low probability events and underestimate the likelyhood of high probability events.  A rational thinkers are often Fooled by Randomness and do not understand the human bias towards seeing patterns, where none exists, which is known as apophenia.  Rational thinkers are not influenced by how a problem is framed. If someone tells you there's a 1% chance you will die. If you go skydiving or they tell you there's a 99% chance, you will live. You should feel the same about skydiving.  in reality, the framing of information matters, and people are more likely to avoid The 1% chance of death and give the thumbs up to the 99% chance of living.  Logic.  Rational thinkers act logically and consistently.  Rational thinking shows, consistent preferences, if you like a better than B and B better than C, you should like a better than C. There are many real world examples, where people don't follow this logic.  Experiments show that many people do not have consistent preferences and will say they like for example, bacon more than Skittles and Skittles more than Doritos. But then they'll say that they like Doritos more than bacon, this is not rational.  Biased irrational, thinkers, overweight short-term gains and overreact to recent or intense. Stimuli.  When trading news be aware of recency bias, don't overweight some random news item just because it's yelling at you in red, all caps from Bloomberg.  Rational thinkers seek to understand alternative hypotheses. Not just their own hypothesis. They accept evidence that contradicts their View.  Irrational thinkers, overweight, confirming evidence and ignore contradictory evidence.  Rational thinkers are not overconfident, they understand why it's funny that 80% of drivers think they are above average.  That's just a short list of some of the differences between rational and irrational. Thought there are hundreds of examples enough to fill any books. We'll go in depth on many of these forms of bias later. Now that you have a sense of rational versus irrational, thought patterns, and methods, let's look at how to measure rationality  Testing for rationality.  The cognitive reflection test CRT measures rationality using just 3 questions. It's a fairly new test invented in 2005 by Shane. Frederick, here's 1 of the 3 questions. The other 2 questions appear later in the book.  Question. If it takes 5 machines, 5 minutes to make 5. Widgets how long would it take? 100 machines to make a 100 widgets  Did you answer 100 minutes?  The correct answer is 5 minutes. Each machine makes 1 wiget every 5 minutes, therefore 100 machines can make 100, widgets in 5 minutes. Those who answer quickly use a shortcut to jump to the answer of 100 minutes, those that use system 2, slow down calculate the correct answer which is 5 minutes.  There are other more in-depth rational thinking questionnaires the CRT is valid and reliable. But the 3 questions in the CRT have become somewhat, well known. And if you already know about what is essentially a trick question, your unlikely to answer it incorrectly the second time.  The best explanation for many of the deviations between efficient markets and reality come from the irrational behavior of the human beings interacting in markets. Therefore 1 might reasonably assume a connection between rationality and trading  now, let's look at highlights from some of the most interesting recent, Unsuccess in trading.  research paper 1, what makes a good Trader on the role of quad skills, behavioral biases, and intuition on Trader performance 2015,  This paper studied individual Trader performance in an experimental setting it then compared performance to participants measures of financial literacy, cognitive skill, behavioral bias, and theory of mind.  They conclude that behavioral bias particularly overconfidence and the failure to understand random sampling explains Trader earnings. While standard cognitive and theory of Mind skills are of marginal importance.  Those that scored high on the CRT and exhibited less behavioral bias earned significantly lower than those who did not standard intelligence and theory of Mind ability were not important.  Rationality quotient or RQ is more important than IQ.  Here are a few quotes of interest from the paper. Along with my thoughts, quote Common Thread running through each of these behavioral biases. Is the individual's inability to refrain from using automatic responses and simple herur sticks, end quote  Bad Traders, think fast, good Traders. Think a bit slower, the Paradox here. Is that sometimes you need to think fast when you're trading, because speed can be an edge. If an important announcement hits the wires you can't always sit around waiting for system 2 to deliver a verdict. If you don't hit the buttons right away, someone else will. In other words some short-term trading requires a ready, shoot aim thinking style. That's okay.  If you're trading headlines events and quick, Reaction Time trades, you can overcome the Hur stick or fast thinking Problem by trading in 2 steps.  Step 1, when you see a headline or something that makes you want to act, go ahead act, go to market and get set on your position.  Step 2.  Once you have the position on, take a step back. Back and analyze your actions using system 2.  Is this logical? Or is this a dumb idea? You need to have the force of mind to take a trade-off right away? Usually at a small loss. If your system to analysis says that your system won't idea was wrong. This is hard because we tend to have trouble selling at a small loss. We tend to overvalue assets or positions. We already own  Note that if you enter trades using system 1 that is reacting quickly to headlines. For example, then subsequently evaluate them, more fully using system 2. You need to overcome both the endowment effect and anchoring bias in order to get out of bad trades. Quickly, if your system to analysis says, this is a bad trade, don't wait for the price to get back to break, even cut the position and move on good short-term trading involves taking many small losses.  The endowment effect also known as divestiture. Reversion, says that when we own something, we value it more highly than, if we did not already own it. Anchoring bias says we will attach importance to the price at which we entered a trade even though that price is irrelevant. Once we have the trade on, we'll talk about both these forms of Trader bias and many others in Chapter 7.  Side note. Here's a funny because it's true. Anecdote on the endowment effect from a 2019 blog post by Michael batnick.  Quote years ago when I was trading probably 2010 or 2011, I had some fun trading weekly options around earnings releases, I was gambling which is not something I only recently came to terms with, I knew it at the time which is why I never put a lot of money at risk. During 1 of these wages, I meant to buy calls but by accident I bought puts in that moment of funny thing happened. It wouldn't have been much trouble to unwind this trade but instead, I rationalized why puts for the right decision. I guess I'm bearish. Now I thought  My actions influence, my mindset. I was owned by my possessions.  End quote.  The next quote of interest from the paper. Quote individuals tend to mistakenly believe that they observe predictable patterns in randomly generated data end quote.  This is the failure to understand random sampling, randomly generated, data creates, all sorts of patterns, human beings are hardwired to see patterns. We see faces in sockets.  Animals in the clouds patterns and randomly generated stock charts, and Jesus Christ on toast.  human C patterns, even where there's often only Randomness, this is why I tend to be technical analysis with great skepticism, technical analysis, pushes us toward patterned seeking Behavior,  when we should instead be fighting our bias to see patterns everywhere,  and the final quote from the paper,  Quote, our studies show that people who are immune to commonly known behavioral biases, perform the best in experimental, asset markets, and quote.  This is the conclusion of many studies RQ is more important than IQ you're either. Part of the unbiased efficient markets or you're creating exploitable inefficiency with your biased irrational actions.  Research paper 2 mental capabilities, trading Styles and asset market bubbles, Theory and experiment 2016.  These researchers first did a series of experiments to evaluate participants on 2 Dimensions analyzing and mentalizing.  Mentalizing is a psychology term that relates to an individual's ability to think about and understand their own thoughts and the thoughts of others.  It is conceptually similar though, not identical to empathy or theory of mind. It essentially measures whether you can put yourself in someone else's shoes or see the world through their eyes.  the researchers ran a typical asset market trading experiment to see how different individuals, would behave, and perform, the core idea is at different actors, behave differently in the market and if we split individuals into groups, we might see Pattern emerge in terms of trading success.  Analytical skill was measured as successful performance in mathematics logic and probability. While mentalizing was defined as the ability to understand the mental states of others and predict their behavior.  The Traders were broken into 4 quadrants high and low mentalizing and high and low analytical.  The results showed that those with high analytical and high mentalizing performed by far the best.  Those with low analytical loss money regardless of their mentalizing and those with high analytical and low mentalizing, made a tiny bit of money.  Mathematics logic and understanding of probability, when the ability to analyze, the behavior of others, has some power. But only if you have the rationale and probabilistic thinking first,  Analytical rational thinking is necessary and sufficient to earn a profit but the more well-rounded individual earns much more in this experiment. Research paper 3, good thinking or gut feeling, cognitive reflection and intuition and traitors bankers and financial non-experts 2015.  This paper looks directly at CRT versus intuition and comes to an unambiguous conclusion Traders score higher on the CRT and favor, the avoidance of mental shortcuts compared to non Traders, they rely more on system 2 than non Traders. Furthermore the study found that Traders do not rely on intuition any more than non traders to quote the studies conclusion.  Quote.  While Traders are apparently no different in their use of Intuition or gut feeling to other people. The majority of them are markedly improved in their propensity to engage in reflective thinking and less susceptible to cognitive impulsivity.  End quote.  The study also says that some would argue that high CRT scores could be equivalent to elevated numeracy. While there is overlap between Icrt scores, rationality and strong. Numeracy other Studies have shown that numeracy and CRT performance are not the same thing.  And finally, research paper, number 4, Trader personality and Trader performance. A framework and financial Market experiment 2008.  This paper involves an asset market trading experiment where results are compared to 6 personality traits, locus of control maximizing tendency regret disposition self-monitoring sensation seeking and type A type B Behavior. The primary conclusion of the paper is that those who trade less and those who work limit orders that is act like market makers, not price, takers, outperform those who trade more frequently and cross more spreads using Market orders.  The foundings are consistent with many other papers and investigations which show that overtrading leads to worse performance.  The main driver of the underperformance from Trading, too much is transaction. costs, but even in experiments where there are no transaction costs, the subjects that trade most perform worse  Good Traders, wait for outsized opportunities. They don't trade phonetically reacting to every bit of flickering price action and I say this as someone who must fight not to react to every bit of flickering price action, while high CRT was a consistent variable in predicting the earnings of traders. In many studies, the results of experiments and research on softer skills. Like theory of Mind are mixed  For every research paper, that found a positive connection between mentalizing or theory of mind and Trader earnings, there was 1 that suggested the opposite.  My conclusion is that it is absolutely clear from the research that rational thinking is the number 1 trait of a successful Trader.  High intelligence numerously and financial literacy are also important trading with gut, feel intuition and similar soft. Skills is less important and sometimes counterproductive, Yes, gut and intuition can be the subconscious processing of reams of information and amalgamation of disparate data and knowledge. It is common for people to know something without knowing how they know it. Then again, gut and intuition are often just the way fear bias and other bad influences make their way into our thinking and behavior.  You may have seen breathless media reports in the mid-2010s with headlines like gut instinct, do Traders, have a 6 cents, trumpeting a few small studies that seem to suggest Trader intuition is a great importance. I read those studies and they generally had tiny sample, sizes, 10 to 20 Traders, and were unconvincing in my opinion.  Distilling all the research down to 1 Formula. I get this new equation.  Trading, success equals rational thinking plus IQ plus self-control minus overconfidence.  Recall from chapter 3 that the formula for General success money academic grades. Sports and all that was success equals conscientiousness plus IQ, plus Talent skill, plus luck, minus neuroticism.  So I'm going to combine it all together to get this final equation, Alpha Trader equals rational, intelligent skilled conscientiousness, and calibrated confidence.  Note, my equation for trading success excludes. Some traits that are important, but not critical to trading success. I did not include risk appetite, for example, people at each end of the risk, taking Continuum extremely risk, averse or highly, risk-seeking might underperform those in the middle, but risk appetite is not an important character trait in the literature on trading performance.  Furthermore risk tolerance can be dialed up or down fairly easily with a simple set of rules. I've seen Traders at every point on the risk, taking Spectrum succeed.  note that before the year 2000 or so IQ was less important than trading because trading was more Skill-based and less quantitative.  Now, a higher level of intelligence is required, although I would argue that Wall Street currently over values IQ and academics and does not focus enough on grit Street smarts and fire in the belly.  My equation leaves out many positive attributes that most certainly make for better, Traders does not include positive attitude or ability to handle stress. For example, these are useful, but not critical attributes when it comes to trading success.  There are plenty of grumpy stressed out traders. That still make money. Sure that's not ideal and certainly does not meet my personal definition of success. But only the indispensable traits are in the equation. Many other attributes will help you succeed in trading, but the formula I laid out is the mashed potatoes. Everything else is gravy  That concludes this chapter and our look into the research on trading success. I highlighted some specific papers because they capture the gist of the broader literature, but please note that I went through piles of research. Before I reach my conclusions. This chapter just shared a few highlights.  All right, this is the end of part 1 and our look at why some Traders succeed. But most fail  In part 2, we go deeper, we look at rationality, conscientiousness and overconfidence in more detail plus dig into many other important Trader attributes to help you learn of all, adapt and improve.  Part 2, the alpha Trader mindset, part, 2 is a deeper look at the winning trades, and negative attributes that combine to lead to trading riches or ruin. It's also an exploration of what it means to be rational and unbiased a state of mind that can never be perfectly attained, but which is always the goal.  Remember nobody, embodies every positive trait or is free from every negative aspect. The goal is to be brutally. About your strengths and weaknesses. And then work hard to boost positives tame weaknesses and plug leaks.  As you listen to the next 3 chapters, think about your own assets and limitations, take notes and never Focus exclusively on fixing weaknesses awareness of your strengths and the ability to build on those strengths is just as important as the ability to identify and address weakness.  Part 2 is divided into 3, chapters chapter 5, strengths and positive, traits chapter 6, weaknesses and leads and chapter 7 rational unbiased Trading.  Let's start with specific positive character traits that increase a Trader's probability of success.  Chapter 5 level up.  The traits and habits you need to succeed.  There's no single X Factor in trading. Successful trading combines a variety of disparate skills and characteristics. Remember the formula from chapter 4  Alpha Trader equals, rational plus intelligent plus skilled, plus conscientious, plus calibrated confidence.  As we unpack the essential traits, a broader list emerges. Let's go beyond the equation and dig into more detail to identify particular traits that I believe lead to success in trading.  In the PDF. I show a complete list of positive Trader attributes.  It's a big list.  Cognitive traits rely on intellectual effort. Conscious thought and reasoning, most cognitive skills can be built up over time. Non-cognitive traits can be static or changeable.  As I said, in chapter 3, conscientiousness, generally increases with age, so take advantage of this and work, especially hard on skills that come under that umbrella like organization. Self-control focus and preparedness.  Even if you cannot change some parts of who you are. Understanding your fixed innate characteristics, can help you manage yourself better and avoid putting yourself in a position to fail. Whether you are a new Trader or a Wy veteran. The point of this section is to get you thinking about your own profile and areas where you can improve.  Nobody has every skill and characteristic in abundance many of the skills can be built and weaknesses can be managed. Your goal is to know yourself. Well enough that you can take the actions needed to excel  Work on your weaknesses and level up your strengths, using the methods and ideas in the chapters that follow.  I'll discuss these traits individually but I won't waste your time to finding them. As I know, you know what? All these words mean.  This chapter will tell you what each trait means for trading. And most importantly, give you specific ideas and tips on how you can level up in each area.  Cognitive traits.  Let's start with the cognitive traits, which are the first 2 Columns of the table in the PDF.  Rational, we talked a bit about rationality in the last chapter.  Chapter 7 is a deep dive into all the ways, humans act irrationally. So I will leave the topic alone for now.  Suffice it to say, Alpha Traders think and act rationally, after analyzing heaps of research thinking about all the Traders, I've worked with over many years and studying my own best and worst trading periods. I feel strongly that the best way to describe the alpha Trader in 1 Word is rational  Intelligent knowledgeable, and informed.  Medium to high intelligence especially as it relates to numbers is important. In trading, you need to do calculations on the Fly. Understand, expected value and probability. No basic economics, micro and macro. Self puzzles, interpret stories and understand or filter often conflicting and incomplete information.  it's not rocket science but it's also not shape sorting  IQ is somewhat fixed, but knowledge, and information can be accumulated over. Time to increase your Edge.  Here are some ways to level up your knowledge.  1. Think about areas you are weak and take courses online. For example, take a course, or read a book about macroeconomics options, trading, technical analysis, Financial history, or trading, psychology Branch out,  Play the long game, whether you're 25 or 50, keep learning. Don't just focus on your weaknesses. If you're strong and derivatives, keep getting better. Go deep into the topics you love but also explore areas, where you lack familiarity.  Become expert or near expert in as many domains as possible.  2, read more.  The Economist ft while. Street Journal books and blogs. This is such a simple piece of advice, but many people in finance say they are distracted at the desk all the time, or it's too hard to find the time to read.  If you read more than everyone else, you'll be better informed than everyone else. And it's cumulative. You can up your efficiency by scanning a wider range of relevant blogs and news feeds. Even if you don't read every single word of every single article, you capture the Zeitgeist by scanning more sources,  3.  Think of a market adjacent to what you trade and learn about it. If you trade the Canadian dollar study the oil Market. If you trade, S&P futures, read a book about SPX options. If you trade gold, read a book about Platinum,  4.  Email or message. Someone who knows more than you do about a topic. If you read a Blog and find it, interesting email, the writer with a follow-up question. If you just read a book about markets, reach out to the author on LinkedIn, Ask a specific question. If you trade dollar yawn at a bank, walk over and talk to the person who trades 10year bonds.  5 read Financial history.  And finally, 6 be thoughtful about your information sources and reduce redundancy.  There's a major surplus of Finance information and Analysis at there when I went to work at a hedge fund, after my employer Lehman Brothers, went under, I had 20 Banks covering me at first, there was so much redundancy and useless information. I quickly narrowed my list down to 5 Banks and found that was much more manageable. How many overnight summaries does 1 person need  There's plenty of good research on Wall Street, but there's also plenty of fluff. Get to know the strategists and researchers out there. Read the best and filter the rest.  A few hundred good, Twitter follows are better than a few thousand, you'll find as you expand your media consumption, you get more and more redundant information nonsense. And cut and paste headlines that just waste your time.  If you work at a hedge fund or institution, my estimate is you hit diminishing returns at about 3 to 5 coverage Banks? After that, the duplication is probably not worth the odd bit of unique analysis that squeaks through  The philosophy be curious, keep learning and build knowledge for the long run.  Cognitive trait. Number 3 is quantitative.  many trading roles require in-depth knowledge of statistics, and the ability to code or program usually in Python  Even a Trader in the most vanilla discretionary or short-term trading seat benefits from quantitative sophistication.  I'll love numeracy under this heading as well, because the ability to intuitively understand numbers helps Traders enormously. For example, many Market, making roles require quick calculations converting Yen to Dollars when a salesperson asks, for a price in a fast market. For example. Traders that can do quick, Mental Math have a small advantage over. Those that cannot  here's how to level up your quantitative skills.  1, learn about expected value and decision trees.  These are specially useful when trading economic or Market events with discrete outcomes for example.  You think the FED will cut rates today and the market has it priced as 80% 20% in favor of a rate cut.  A professional rates Trader might say that, 20 out of 25 basis points are priced in.  You decide to risk. 200,000 on the trade, you'll make 50,000. If you're correct and the FED Cuts rates, if they don't cut you, lose your thousand dollars.  Many people will see this negative leverage as bad, you risking 200 to make just 50 but it is not inherently good or bad. It depends on the probabilities, you assigned to each outcome.  The tricky thing with Market probabilities, is that unlike probabilities in gambling, they are not known. Or measurable you have to estimate them. Accurately. Estimating, probabilities is a skill. That gives you an edge in trading.  Incomplete information is 1 of the challenging Hallmarks of markets as an exercise in probability.  Now going back to our example, let's say, you think there's a 95% chance. The FED will cut rates in the PDF. I show the expected value of a 200,000 wager on that event.  And you can see in the PDF that even though your risking 200 to make 50.  It's still an excellent trade idea.  Clearly though, your confidence in that 95% figure is key to making this bet.  If you think it's more like 70 or 80% then stay away, your view is about the same as the market.  I assume that most people listening to this book, have a pretty clear understanding of expected value. But if you're new to the game or you are sick the day, this was taught in University. Statistics brush up go online and take a short course or do some Reading about expected value. Good Traders work. Comfortably with EV both explicitly and subconsciously.  2, Learn Python, this is rapidly, becoming the standard for data analysis in. Finance, Excel is fine, but not as good as python, not even close.  3, take a course in statistics probability or data visualization.  4 read academic, research papers, about the assets you trade.  Freely available academic research is a hugely underutilized Resort. Most research can be found and read online. Go to Google Scholar and type in a topic, you find interesting, for example, Stock Market, inefficiency trading psychology currency valuation or high frequency trading, if you find a good paper, go to the bibliography and read some of the papers cited.  5 learn about bayes' theorem and Bayesian updating. There are many, many good websites on this topic including toward data. Cam.  The basic idea of Bayesian updating is that good forecasters. Start with a prior probability and then update it as new information comes in.  This is in contrast to people that form an opinion and then ignore new information. Good thinking and good forecasting are not possible without basing and updating here's a simple example.  Your name is Bob, you're in high school and you estimate, there's a 60% chance that Phoebe will go out on a date with you. Once you finally get the guts to ask her,  The next day you say hi to Phoebe as you enter chemistry class. She says, hey Tim and floats toward her desk leaving a sweet cloud of vanilla scent in her wake.  Using Bayesian updating you take the new information which is, she doesn't know your name and update your prior 60% estimate to 25%.  In contrast, someone who does not use Bayesian methods. Might ignore the new information because it does not fit. His prior belief. This is known as confirmation. Bias, which we will discuss later in Chapter 7.  He might lie to himself and say ah, it's fine. There's probably someone named Tim behind me. She was talking to him even though there's nobody named him in chemistry class.  This is how confirmation bias works. We trick ourselves and ignore information that doesn't fit our priors.  Update. Oh no, Phoebe just blew a kiss to Bad Boy, Eric Cooper. At the back of the class, you revise, your probability that she will go on a date with you down to 0.84%.  What side benefit of using bass Theory Bayesian updating in terms like prior probability and updating your priors is it makes you sound super smart.  7 Read Super forecasting, by Phil tetlock and Dan Gardner. This is 1 of the best books on statistics and forecasting and it has tons of applications both to the real world and to trading the book also does an excellent job of explaining Bays. So you kill 2 bullet points with 1 Stone, if you read I would say super forecasting, is 1 of the books that is most influenced by quantitative thinking style, along with Fooled by Randomness by Nassim, taleb Risk, by Dan Gardner and thinking, in bets by Annie Duke.  And finally, back test your ideas.  If you notice that stocks tend to fall every Monday and rally every Tuesday, back test, it if it feels like oil rallies every day from 2 p.m. to 3 p.m. check it out, is it true or false?  Whenever a hypothesis appears in your head dig in and figure out. If it's true playing with ideas and data, like this can Inspire new ideas and a better understanding of the inner workings of the markets you trade.  If you don't know how to back test, just open Excel and start messing around. This is the kind of thing. You can teach yourself with the bit of effort.  Calibrated confidence.  Given the critical importance of confidence and especially overconfidence in trading will dig more deeply into this topic. In chapter 7 for now. I'll just say high confidence is required for trading, but overconfidence is the worst leak.  Positive trait. Number 5, independent thinker.  Important and independent thinker is not someone, who is contrarian all the time disagrees with everyone or loves Playing devil's advocate, that is not independent thinking that is reflexive opposition and that is not good. Independent thinking means that you analyze information, using your own framework and come to logical conclusions. You develop your own beliefs incorporating as much information as possible. Information can include the curated beliefs of others. Sometimes your conclusions agree with the crowd and you hop on the trend. Sometimes, you're on the other side of consensus. So you take a contrarian View.  Many human beings are hardwired to conform in a famous 1951 experiment. By Solomon asch. 8 subjects were placed in a room.  7 of them were actors. And the eighth was the true subject of the experiment. They were all shown 2 cards and asked to answer out loud which line a b or c was the same length as the line on the card, on the left, the true subject was seated so that he or she would answer last  In the test where the first 7 in the group, answer correctly, the subject, answer correctly, 99% of the time on the other hand, when the group of actors all responded with the same wrong answer the test subject, give the correct response only 63% of the time.  This result is surprising and unintuitive because if you look at the cards in the PDF, you can see the answer is extremely obvious.  You might say man? That's dumb, I'd never do that, don't be? So sure. This experiment has been replicated many times and you have the benefit of being an outsider with complete information. Other experiments show that almost everyone conforms to social influence to a high degree.  When? Humans have incomplete knowledge. Their instinct is to follow the group many people in the asch. Experiment did not follow the group, but the experiment involved, an easy question with an obvious answer. Everyone should have answered correctly yet. Almost 37% of people did not  Google Stanford Prison experiments for another example of the astonishing levels of Conformity observed in experimental settings,  In markets, where incomplete information and group Behavior are an intrinsic part of the game, you need to make sure you are always thinking for yourself.  Don't get caught up in the CNBC or Twitter hype or get sucked in by what the smart guy at the big hedge fund wrote in his opinion, piece in the Ft think for yourself.  Also note that if your reaction when reading about the asch experiment was,  I would never pick the wrong line in that experiment. You're just like almost everyone else. Who believes that bias is something that happens to everyone else but not to them.  Group think and Conformity bias. Are real and impact, smart people, and dumb people alike.  when it comes to Independent thinking Peter, Theo Nails it with this quote  the most contrarian thing of all is not to oppose the crown, but to think for yourself,  Character number 6, flexible and open-minded.  The cure for many forms of bias in trading and in life is to be flexible and open-minded. This is captured by the concept of strong opinions weakly held.  A framework for thinking developed by technology, forecaster and Stanford scholar. Paul safo, here's his description of how to think.  Quote.  allow your intuition to guide you to a conclusion, no matter how imperfect, this is the strong opinion part then, and this is the weakly held part, prove yourself wrong,  Engage in Creative doubt, look for information that doesn't fit. Indicators that point in an entirely different direction.  Eventually, your intuition will kick in and a new hypothesis will emerge out of the ruble ready to be ruthlessly torn apart. Once again, you'll be surprised by how quickly the sequence of faulty forecasts will deliver you to a useful result end quote.  Now, this sounds a lot like Bayesian updating, right? Start with a prior and update it as you get more information.  It also sounds a lot like my discussion earlier of how to trade headlines with a ready. Shoot, aim approach, you react using your system 1 or gut, instinct. Then you quickly analyze your action and look for confirming or most critically contradictory evidence. You look, not just at your chosen hypothesis but other competing ones,  I write a daily macro newsletter called amfax that goes out to a sizable list of hedge fund and real money portfolio, managers and strategists.  1 of the great benefits. Of sending out amfs, is that when I publish my hypothesis I have a few thousand people out there vetting it and consciously or unconsciously looking for alternatives.  The email responses I get make me aware of alternative ways of looking at the world that I might not have considered.  You can replicate this process by getting your hypotheses out there. If you have a strong view, share it with your co-workers and see what comes back. Drop it on Twitter. If you're thick-skinned enough, send an email to a few Traders. You respect with your thesis laid out in 1 or 2 paragraphs,  if you're an introvert, don't feel like you have to remain an introvert forever. Push yourself to make new connections. I was a shy kid and pretty insecure in high school. I never liked meeting new people and I'd consider myself an introvert by Nature. I changed over time though, as I saw the benefits of reaching out to people and making new connections and moving out of my comfort zone.  When you send your thesis out into the wild, the responses will inform you. Not just by their content but also by their Tone. If you get a series of agitated replies with a bunch of rebuttals, you can easily Bat Away, you're probably onto a good trade idea.  Strong, push back indicates that people are positioned the other way.  If you can easily refute their arguments, then Happy Days.  On the other hand, sometimes you might get a bunch of well-reasoned replies that highlight facts. You omitted from your analysis, then it's time to reassess.  Exploring alternative. Hypothesis is the Bedrock of good thinking.  Start with the strong View and then try to step outside yourself as much as possible to look at alternative scenarios. This is part of why expected value and decision tree calculations among many other forms of good thinking, add value, they force you to look at all the possible paths. You take multiple possible outcomes and attempt to wait them, according to their probabilities.  You don't just take a view and stick with it, regardless of incoming or alternative information. The book psychology of intelligence analysis by Richards. J Huer junior is the best elucidation of good thinking. I've read the author work for the CIA for 45 years in various roles, including operations, Counter Intelligence and intelligence analysis.  the book explains how human bias impedes, clear thinking  Much of it applies directly to Trading.  The book is out of print, but fortunately, it is freely available on the cia's website.  Of particular relevance is part 2 tools for thinking especially chapter 8 analysis of competing hypotheses.  If you want access to the full Buffet of information, I suggest you read the whole book. It's less than 200 pages and it's not boring. If you want, the quick meal at least read chapter 8. For now, here's an appetizer. My synopsis of Huer summary of chapter 8  Step by step outline of analysis of competing hypotheses. IES, 1. Identify the possible hypotheses to be considered, use a group of analysts with different perspectives to brainstorm the possibilities.  2 make a list of significant evidence and Arguments for and against each hypothesis.  3, prepare a matrix with hypotheses, across the top and evidence down the side. Analyze, the diagnosticity of the evidence and arguments that is identify which items are most helpful in judging the relative likelihood of the hypothesis.  For refine The Matrix reconsider, the hypothesis, and delete evidence, and arguments that have no diagnostic value.  5 draw tentative conclusions about the relative likelihood of each hypothesis. Proceed by trying to disprove the hypothesis, rather than proved them.  6 analysis of your conclusion is to a few critical items of evidence. Consider the consequences for your analysis if that evidence were wrong. Bleeding or subject to a different interpretation.  7 report conclusions, discuss the relative likelihood of all the hypotheses, not just the most likely 1, and 8 identify milestones for future observation. That may indicate events are taking a different course than expected.  Be thoughtful, and look at alternative hypotheses, with an open mind, lay out the arguments against your view and see how you feel about them. Do they make sense are they easily refuted?  Be aware that when you are in a position, you are not objective your. Under the influence of bias when you're in a trade, you own something, the trade and the view that led to it and people don't like giving up what they own.  Therefore if you're feeling uncomfortable about a position, the best bet is to take it off. Then once you're flat, you can analyze with an open unbiased mind.  As I state in my first book, The Art of currency trading rule number 7 of FX trading flat is the strongest position. When in doubt, get out it's easier to honestly evaluate competing hypotheses when you are flat open-minded and flexible.  Positive trait. Number 7, creative.  People outside. Wall Street, don't generally associate the world of Finance with creativity but they should.  Orthodox. Follow the crowd thinking does not work in trading.  Most of the legends of Finance had some creative Insight that took them to another level.  For example, Milan's idea for high, yield junk bonds, Paul Tudor, Jones, and Peter. Bush's idea to Overlay past and present chart patterns, to predict the crash of 87.  George soros's idea of reflexivity and Ray dalio's idea for the all-weather portfolio, which came to be known as risk, parity.  Creative thinking does not have to mean you come up with ideas that completely revolutionize Finance, can you slice and dice data in a new and interesting way? And thus, create more accurate short-term Market forecasts, Can you think outside the box to discover new variables that will help guide you through the noise?  For example in 2006 it was fairly well known that copper and gold prices could be used as predictors for the Australian dollar because those 2 Commodities are significant Australian exports.  Similarly it was known that crude oil was a driver of the Canadian dollar because Canada exports huge amounts of crude but there was no such variable for the New Zealand dollar. For some reason and my job at Lehman Brothers, in those days was trading the Aussie Canada and New Zealand dollars.  So I Googled, what are the major exports of New Zealand and the answer is milk products.  Milk butter and cheese account for 25% of New Zealand's exports. And milk prices are an important marginal driver of New Zealand's GDP.  So I overlaid a chart of dairy Futures with the New Zealand dollar and ding, there's a pretty good fit correlation Causation yada yada, but when 2 things overlay and there's a logical connection between them in the real economy, you're probably on to something.  When I first published the overlay in 2006, I got a few hahaha emails in response, but eventually the idea caught on and now it's a common variable for people to look at when assessing the fair value of the New Zealand dollar.  recently someone sent me a chart overlaying Norwegian spot salmon price with the Norwegian krona and I was suitably impressed, there's still room for innovation in trading  Try your best to think creatively about problems in finance. It's not always a Brute Force quantitative solution that is needed.  To be created, does not mean you have to paint or write poems. It means you come up problems with imagination and develop original ideas.  Circling back to her quote.  Think of information in memory as somehow interconnected like a massive multi-dimensional spiderweb. It is possible to connect any point within this web to any other point. When analysts connect the same points frequently, they form a path that makes it easier to take that route in the future. Once they start thinking along certain channels, they tend to continue thinking the same way and the path may become a rut. The path seems like the obvious and natural way to go.  Information and Concepts located near that path are readily available. So the same images, keep coming up information, not located near that path is less likely to come to mind.  Talking about breaking mindsets or creativity or even. Just openness to new information is really talking about spinning, new links and pads through the web of memory.  These are links among facts and Concepts or between schemata for organizing facts or concepts that were not directly connected or only weakly connected before new ideas result from the association of old elements in New. Combinations.  Previously, remote elements of thought suddenly become associated in a new and useful combination.  When the linkage is made the light dawns.  This ability to bring previously, unrelated information and ideas together in meaningful ways is what marks the open-minded, imaginative creative analyst end quote.  Here are a few ways to be more creative in trading 1, Study other asset markets or businesses with linkages to your Market. The more you understand the iron ore Market, the better you can trade the Australian dollar. The more you understand American Airlines, the better. You can trade the airlines ETF xal.  Drill into the principal factors that drive your market and learn about them in detail.  2 read about random and varied topics. It seems so obvious. But I never really understood this until recently. If you read voraciously, you load new information into your mind. And that information can And cross-pollinate with old information and Spark new ideas. Most ideas come from combining 2 forms of disparate knowledge. If you read about art or outer space or fractals or whatever, cool Finance related ideas, May pop into your head from time to time. Thanks to the stimulation.  3, go for a walk sitting at your desk staring at numbers going up and down will drop you into a rut at some point, get up and go outside for a few minutes. I've had many moments of clarity on the way to the bathroom or on my way to pick up, Panera for lunch.  For talk to people in your network.  New ideas come from contact with new streams of thought. Don't be a take her though. Offer ideas to your network as well. Don't be the guy that just emails. 10 people saying what you thinking to form a strong Network, you need to both offer and receive information and ideas.  N5. Be curious and develop interests outside of Finance. Learn some history. Listen to British rap music. Exercise, your brain, like it's a muscle.  And that brings us to positive trait. Number 8, curious  Curious people are more interesting curiosity, makes you smarter. It helps you learn some. People are naturally more Curious than others, but anyone can become more intentionally, curious, It's not that hard.  As 1 might expect, there's a direct link between curiosity and academic performance, curious, kids, learn more and perform better.  But research shows that information seeking and curiosity. Also exert a positive influence on Adult Learning and job performance. The simplest way to be curious, is to Simply ask why as much as possible back in the day when everyone knew that Apple's fell from trees. Newton was the 1 to ask. Why don't Apple's fall sideways? Why don't they fall upwards?  When you see a phenomenon in the markets, ask, why?  This is particularly true when back testing when you discover a pattern that back test. Successfully. Can you explain why it works? If you can there's a much greater probability that what you discovered will work out of sample?  Much of what you find. Sifting through data is just data snooping or data mining. But when you find patterns and can explain them logically, you have something much more powerful.  Part of being curious, is also just not being lazy, when you see a term that you don't fully understand in a news article investigate.  A few years ago there was a headline saying the ECB might open up its own omt program and a Trader on another desk set out loud, huh? I wonder what omt is that? Went back to eating a sandwich. That's not good.  Curious Trader would hear the announcement and go off and do some research on omt that might lead them to the history of monetary financing and something epic like the book Fiat money in France.  to be curious and conscientious is to be the kind of person that reads the footnotes Positive trait. Number 9, the growth mindset.  If you have kids, you may be familiar with the idea of the growth mindset because it is a trendy Topic in education right now.  The idea was popularized by American psychologist. Carol dwek, here's how she defines it in a 2012 interview.  Quote, in a fixed mindset students, believe their basic abilities, their intelligence, their talents are just fixed traits. They have a certain amount and that's that. And then their goal becomes to look smart all the time and never look down.  In a growth mindset students understand that their talents and abilities can be developed through effort. Good teaching and persistence. They don't necessarily think everyone's the same or anyone can be Einstein but they believe everyone can get smarter if they work at it and quote,  When you reflect on particular negative traits you possess and think. Yeah that's just who I am or that's just me. You cannot grow instead embrace. The surprising plasticity of the human brain and keep learning evolving and improving.  This concept is similar to the Japanese concept of Kaizen or good change, which was a key ingredient in the superior quality and productivity of the Japanese automakers as the eclipsed, North American carmakers in the 1980s with Kaizen or growth mindset, AKA continuous Improvement. You always look to make incremental positive changes and continue to grow.  Without a growth mindset, this audiobook is not going to help you much, because you'll wrongly believe that many of the traits, strengths and weaknesses, you possess are fixed or are too difficult to change. That's not the right attitude, pick a weakness and work on it. You'll notice improvement over time.  When someone says, I'm not a people person, I'm not very good at math. That's a fixed mindset. Clearly people are predisposed a certain way by genetics personality and environment, that's your starting hand. And a growth mindset says that you can overcome, your starting Hand by playing well and thereby outperform your baseline, or starting point.  here's a quick summary of how the 2 mindsets contrast,  Growth mindset believes that can change Embraces challenges persists, despite setbacks, and failures learns from criticism inspired by the success of others fixed mindset believes. I am who I am, avoids challenges, Retreats from obstacles, rejects, negative feedback and is threatened by the success of others.  Even if you are the most disorganized kid in high school, all over the place in University and live like a pig. Right now, you can still become an organized person. You have to drop the idea that you are a certain way and embrace positive change. You don't need to take radical action. Make continuous small changes start small and keep improving every day.  Another Hot Topic in the world of Education is positive trainer trait, number 10.  Grit.  Grit perseverance and mental endurance.  If you have kids, you've probably been bombarded with articles and para copies and TED talks about building grit in your children fail, early fail, fast fail often and the marshmallow tests and all that.  here's how Angela Duckworth, who popularized the term grit defines it  Quote, grit is passion and perseverance for long-term goals. 1 way to think about grit is to consider what grit is not. Grit is not Talent. Grit is not luck. Grit is not how intensely for the moment you want something.  In grit is about having what some researchers call an ultimate concern. A goal you care about so much that it organizes and gives meaning to almost everything you do.  And grit is holding steadfast to that goal even when you fall down, even when you screw up, even when progress toward that. Goal is halting or slow.  End quote.  Alpha Traders have Grit.  Duckworth's book grit, the power of passion and perseverance is on every high-performing parents bookshelf, building grit. And our kids is a strategy to combat the worry that helicopter parents have sheltered kids too much in recent years.  The idea is that showering kids with praise and participation trophies and preparing them for the harsh reality of the cruel. Cruel world makes them weaker, not stronger. While my feeling is that grit has been overplayed and somewhat beaten to death as a trendy. Simple fix, in educational circles that does not mean it is not a valid and important topic. Grit is important in life and critically important in training. 1 thing that many people fail to appreciate is just how grueling and demoralizing training can be even if you're good at it.  For example, I've been collecting data on my trading since 2006, and I make money. Almost exactly 50% of all days. Some years it's 52% some years it's 49%, but my win percentage is surprisingly stable.  The variable that determines my yearly pnl is the magnitude of my updates relative to the magnitude of my down days.  Let's say you're a day trader that works 200 days per year, your net profitable, 50% of those days, if your average update is 6,000 and your average down day is 2,800. These stats are not unrealistic. Here's how much you would make that year.  320,000.  So that's a good income depending on your location and lifestyle, but think about the emotional trajectory of that year you lost money on 100 separate days and losing days. Usually feel pretty bad forget about losing days. How about losing streaks  If your win rates 50/50, that's the same as a coin toss, almost every string of 200 coin, tosses has a streak of at least 7, tales in a row. Some of them have strings of 10 or even 15, tails in a row.  That's a great deal of psychic pain to withstand even if you are a supremely confident that your win rate is truly 50%. If you've only been trading for 3 years and you think your win rates, 50%, then you hit 10 losing days in a row. Will you still be sure your win rate is 50%?  Or will you start to worry? You might have lost your Edge or the market has changed or  this is where grit and mental endurance. Come in sure. When I get trading is fun, but losing at trading is even more unfunded that humans will pay about twice as much to avoid a loss as they will pay for a game. We'll discuss this more in the section on bias.  Knowing that humans feel pain twice as deeply as they feel Joy. You need grit and mental endurance to withstand all the pain of all those losing days. I've come to terms with the distribution of probabilities at this stage of my career. So now, After losing day, it's easier for me to move on than it used to be.  When I was in my 30s there were a few bad days when I walked out of Lehman Brothers, totally numb. 1 day was so bad. I got on the subway, going the wrong way and ended up in Kew Gardens before I realized what was going on.  Now, I find it easier to say, to myself, something like Hills and Valleys, buddy, Hills and Valleys flush your mind, start fresh tomorrow.  That said, when I lose money, 9 days in a row, which is still possible, I can't help but get a little itchy and red face in the middle of the night. Consecutive day. I still might fantasize about turning my keyboard sideways and smashing it over the front edge of my desk. But I don't do that because I know it won't help.  If you've ever played poker in a casino, you understand the concept of mental endurance, sometimes just like in trading, you have to sit there for hours and fold every hand because there's nothing to play. Then you finally get a good hand pocket. Aces play. It perfectly only to lose to the drunk guy. Who hit trip 7s on the river?  Can you internalize the fact that the other player got lucky and finds strength in your own belief in process, not outcome. If you're good, you can  grit is about playing the long game.  obviously there's overlap between grit and some of the other qualities and traits, we've talked about, I wanted to single out grit because it's easy to understand and it captures so much in 1, 4, letter word,  Positive trait, number 11, organized.  Conscientious people are organized. This does not mean they were born organized.  I struggled with organization and executive functioning right into my 30s and when I would miss a meeting or screw something up due to disorganization or bad planning, I'd just say, well, that's how I am. Sorry. Then at some point I found that wasn't good enough. When you have a family, it becomes more difficult to just shrug and say whoops.  Once you abandon the concept of, that's just the way I am on any particular trait. You've taken a huge step toward Evolution and Improvement.  Adopt the growth mindset, the belief that talent and character are not fixed science supports this idea, the human brain exhibits much more plasticity than we. Once thought a growth mindset, instead of a fixed mindset, opens up, all sorts of upside for you as a person including becoming more organized.  The bow meister and gardener book on Willpower that I referenced earlier is a good start. If you want to become more organized, also useful are the 7 Habits of Highly Effective People by covering the checklist Manifesto by go and the Power of Habit by Charles doing  Note that these books can be boiled down into bullet points that will give you 80% of the benefit in 20% of the time.  You can get summaries of most major books by Googling summary book name or by going to Goodreads blinkist and other websites. I find the distilled version of many non-fiction books is good enough to get The point.  Another efficiency trick for non-fiction books. When you start an audio book, set it to 2 times normal speed, and listen for 2 minutes, then set it to 1.5 times normal speed, and it will sound normal efficiency.  Here's what being organized means. In trading  1. You have a plan every day.  An excellent way to lose money. Consistently is to sit down at your computer and start handing the buy and sell buttons with no plan.  My plan comes together as I write and FX each day for most of my career. I've worked at a bank, so riding each day is a natural part of my job.  When I went to a hedge fund for a few years in the early 2010s, there was no reason to write. I Had No 1 to write for and I found my trading was sloppier and more random at first writing, a quick plan in the morning anchors, you and forces you to stop. And think before you start trading  You don't have to write anything. Elaborate can be 2 sentences, you sent to your co-worker or it can be a detailed trade plan. Before each and every trade. The format is not. The thing, the doing it is the thing.  A nice way to approach your plan for the day is to have a simple list that you check off each morning before you start training.  It can have 5 or 6, quick entries. For example, 1 data and events today, 2 strong views, 3, big levels 4, my plan for the day this does not have to be super detailed for an equity day. Trader, might look something like  5 500 Microsoft at 928 a.m. stop loss 14980, reevaluate at 3 p.m.  Trade headlines, with the max risk of 4,000 by Apple on a break of 247 stop-loss 24480. Call Mom at 1:15 p.m. work out 2 p.m. to 3 p.m.  item 5 on your morning. Plan should be dollars at risk. If you use a daily stop-loss, how much are you going to risk today?  And then number 6, you can have a list of side projects, that's stuff you can do. In the market is dead. Reading research spreadsheet, building python Etc.  Having a few of these at the ready will help you stay productive when it's quiet going. Hmm. What should I do? Or flicking through the Daily Mail  If you do your daily plan in Excel, you can carry over whatever side projects you did. Not complete yesterday into today's daily plan.  Try not to trade until all items on your daily plan have been filled in be ready for the day before you start trading.  Don't be the guy who doesn't realize an economic numbers coming out and yells. Whoa what the hell happened? When markets freak out at 10 a.m. be prepared.  And don't watch any sports highlights till after 11:00 a.m. that's unprofessional.  The second way to be organized in trading, is collect data. The best way to learn about and improve your trading is to collect data. What are your trading statistics? There'll be a more complete discussion of what data to collect and how to analyze it in chapter 11 for now. Just know that good training. Collect data and analyze it creatively.  A third way to be organized in trading is to build an optimized. Your information Network, be thoughtful about what information you consume and how you connect with peers and mentors narrow down what you read regularly, and cut out the garbage.  There are a few analysts that I read religiously on the other hand. When I find myself reading the super smart analysis of someone who's been consistently Bears stocks since 2005, I know I'm wasting my time.  Trying to understand the motivation, and by us behind anything. You read, this is particularly important in the era of clickbait and markets are going to crash bear porn.  I've spoken to good journalists who admit that they feel forced to sensationalize headlines and even entire stories in order to satisfy the institutionalized prioritization of clicks over quality.  If you read a story on Bloomberg or the Wall Street Journal, that includes the phrase, unnamed sources that's your first clue that the article could well be Trash.  A journalist can publish any sort of nonsense on the internet and there's very little consequence. If it turns out to be inaccurate, the news cycle moves on, nobody goes back and rates reporters on their past accuracy.  The number 1 thing, they get rated on is number of clicks.  When you read stories and Analysis about financial markets, it's important to know who wrote what you are reading. Finance stories are sometimes written. By Junior journalists would very little knowledge of financial markets. Many Bank analysts and economists, have strong World Views and are committed to a directional bias. If an analyst is bullish. First ask is this analyst always bullish.  Question, the details and sources when reading news articles.  The unsourced and rumor-filled stories run by the major Outlets during the Chinese trade war in 2018 and 2019 were, particularly notable for their inaccuracy after a, while the market caught on and stopped reacting to the non-stop poorly, sourced story. With headlines, like sources, say, trade talks, hit snag.  Every news Outlet published unsourced or poorly sourced articles with headlines, full of exaggeration at times. Be skeptical and weed them out as much as possible. If you react to a headline, read the actual story as quickly as possible afterwards, because there might be less there than you think.  Just to be clear, there are plenty of excellent journalists in finance. My point is simply that you need to pay attention to who wrote Whatever you are reading and the more you know about their track record and by biases the clearer, the lens you're reading through  Next, think about your personal information Network, be thoughtful and efficient about who you talk to what websites, you read who you follow on Twitter and who you interact with? Can you prune the network a bit and get rid of some of the time sucking or negative value, add channels?  For example, I find reading tweets from a list of about 250 to 500 handles is a productive. Useful way to acquire timely information. On the other hand, I know to refrain from Reading replies and reactions to tweets, that's an incredible waste of time.  And I try my best never to read or reply to political or trolling tweets.  Don't get sucked into the time wasting negativity Vortex of comment sections on social media, or the web.  They are time sucking garbage dumps. Often representing the lowest forms of humanity.  The worst possible place to spend your limited and precious time.  Twitter and Zero Hedge. For example, can be useful sources of information, just be sure to filter properly and avoid pointless time, spent in the comments section rabbit hole.  Number 4, write it down or type it out.  Thoughts are abstract and fuzzy writing with a pen is solid and concrete. If you think I'm going to cut my Apple short at 285, that's completely different. From writing cut Apple, 285 on a piece of paper and having those words stare up, You as the stock rallies from 28250 to 28475.  The same goes for any plans or ideas you have, there's so much noise in your head. So many competing voices vying for airtime.  Don't assume you can formulate a plan in there then execute it successfully without writing anything down.  Again, this doesn't have to mean anything more than scratching a few notes on a piece of paper or recording, some thoughts in a spreadsheet.  Research shows that when you write down a goal, you are more likely to achieve it.  When you write something down, at solidifies it transforms from abstract into concrete,  When you write something down, you signal to your brain. This is important and your brain records it as such.  the pathways and connections developed in your brain are different when you write something down because the encoding process is different,  The encoding is stronger, more robust, and information is recalled more easily. If you want something to happen, write it down. Another benefit of writing down stop losses, take profits ideas and goals, is that it is harder to wiggle out of them when they are staring. Right at you, you can't convince yourself that you never really. Totally were going to stop at at 285. Absolutely. For sure, if you have a huge note on your desk that says cut Apple, 285 that's your past self, sending a message to your future self an Ambiguously in Black Sharpie.  And the fifth way to keep organized and training is keep a trading journal.  A trading journal is the best way to keep track of your progress, especially early in your career. It can be a detailed record of every single trade you do or it can be a few paragraphs you write at the end of the day.  A trading journal can take whatever form you like.  Record a few thoughts each day or record, the specifics of each trade. You do either way, a journal will enhance your ability to analyze performance and improve your process. You'll start to notice repeated mist. Mistakes. You'll identify bias in your views. Hmm, I'm always short bonds and never long that's probably not good. I need to be more flexible.  Your journal entries should focus on your decision-making and process what triggered. The idea how strongly did you feel about? It was it all logic or partly got describe the specifics of the process and the route you took to develop execute and exit the trade.  To enforce the habit of journaling. I send an email to 1 of my peers on the desk. At the end of each day I call it 12:12. Meaning 12 hours back and 12 hours forward. The 12 back part is a quick summary of how my day went, whether I stuck to the plan, whether I over traded and so on the 12th part is my overnight. And next day, trading plan, including stop-loss dollars at risk and maximum position size.  Those are the 5 parts of what it means to be organized in trading. Now, let's move on to the next positive trait that leads. To trading success.  Positive trait, number 12 process oriented.  There's a wide body of literature covering process versus outcome as a rule, you should view your trading. P&l as a semi-random output of your process. You control the process, but you do not control the short-term outcome in trading. The sooner, you understand this, the better  There's a tremendous amount of variance in trading and 1 of the best ways to handle. This is to focus on your process. If the process is good, the results will eventually follow.  Think deeply about your process. Where do your trade ideas come from? Are you just flicking through a few charts and drawn. Some trend lines and expecting that to give you an edge.  Or are you doing the heavy lifting by digging deep into the drivers, participants and idiosyncrasies of your market and uncovering unique insights that are likely not already in the price.  The best book that I've read on the topic of process versus outcome. Is thinking in bets by Annie Duke?  Duke used to be a professional poker player. And while the book talks poker, a fair bit, most of her insights also, apply directly to training. The book is about decision-making with incomplete information. And that's the essence of training.  Trading is like poker in that, each decision relies on incomplete information. And each outcome or trial is strongly influenced by luck. But like poker in the long run, the luck evens out, we'll talk more about luck and variance in chapter 11, but for now, I just want you to understand that if you have a strong process, you will not be as worried about bad luck.  Your goals should mostly focus on process, not outcome. If you need to get to a pretty clear outcome, say a 7 million dollar, trading Revenue budget, work backwards, from there to set goals that are primarily related to process.  Here are some examples of rules that might be part of a solid trading process.  1, complete 6-point, daily plan every day before executing Any trades 2 maximum 10 trades per day? 3, if I stopped out of a trade, don't do the same trade again for 24 hours.  4 back test and build a new trading system for the NASDAQ open.  And 5 contact 3 Traders or other peers each day to share ideas or dialogue.  When you're confident in your process, you can write out the inevitable losing streaks because you understand that outcomes are partially dictated by Randomness in the short term.  Obviously in the end it's the outcome that matters but when you focus on process the outcome magically takes care of itself.  when evaluating trades Traders and trading strategies, always refer to this Matrix,  Good process. Good outcome.  Good process. Bad outcome, bad processed, good outcome and bad processed bad outcome.  Let's look at an example of bad process. Good outcome and see how Traders with good thinking and bad thinking might respond. Oil, just dropped from 42 to 40 and 10 minutes. Jimmy has caught long oil features, and the price is more than $1 through his original stop-loss of 41.  the markets in freefall but he's convinced himself to give it just a little bit more room because there's a big chart point right here and he hadn't noticed that 1 earlier when he first chose to stop loss, Jimmy was originally long at 42 with a stop at 41 and a take-profit at 4380, risking 1 to make 1.8  this was a decent setup because he thought the odds of either side of the trading were about 50/50,  50% probability with the 1.8 to 1 payout is high expected value.  Now he's down 2 dollars on the trade, and can't bring himself to cut it. The logical part of his brain says dude your way through your stop, follow your own rules and get out.  But there's another voice in his head saying Jimmy boy, you know what's going on higher? You just need to hold on just a little bit longer. This is a low baby just hold on. You know you can do it. Then before, Jimmy has a chance to decide which voice to listen to a headline hits. Saudi Arabia to cut oil production, 1 million, barrels per day. As Asian demand Falls, boom, oil spikes, back up to $22, Jimmy cuts the position at flat. He logs out of his trading software and starts scrolling through Facebook memes.  Needless to say, crude rallies to 44 dollars in a straight line afterwards, as a Saudi news triggers, a reassessment of the supply, demand equation, Jimmy thinks. I'm so glad I held on and ignored my stop loss. That's same me a lot of money.  He does not understand bad process. Good outcome.  A good Trader with think. Not only, did I not follow my process? I failed to update my view when the headline came out. Instead of following a good process, I did everything wrong, sure, I broke even, but in the long run, I'm going to blow up or bleed out if I keep doing this.  First I need to automate my stop losses. My broker has a stop loss function that works perfectly fine second. When news comes out, I need to analyze how it impacts my prior hypothesis. Not just get out of the trade because it's back to Flat. That's just doubled. Reference dependence or anchoring bias. All I cared about was the level I got into the trade and my intraday pnl. I should be making trading decisions based on Market factors not based on how I feel about my p&l or random meaningless chart points. I don't deserve to be flat on this trade, I deserve to be down a cart load, I'll count my blessings. Reduce my risk for a day or 2 and spend some time working on my process.  On the flip side, if you do a bunch of analysis on a trade execute, according to your plan, then get blown out of the water by a random headline. Don't feel bad? That's just training.  Every trade has a probability of success and failure and unless your name is Bobby, Axelrod the probability of success on a trade is never going to be 100%.  As long as you stick to the plan and manage your risk appropriately. Don't worry about losing trades lose Using trades are part of the game.  Think forward, think forward, think forward.  Spend most of your time thinking about the future path of markets and how you can predict and capitalize on that path.  spend as little time as possible, thinking about trades that happen earlier today or yesterday or 6 weeks ago,  the time to look back is when you are a consciously in process analysis mode, looking thoughtfully, back on your trades and trading patterns in recent weeks or months, otherwise think forward.  Alpha Traders are future oriented and don't spend much time on regret. There's nothing more tedious than a Trader that constantly talks about what he was going to do. Or should have done or was definitely going to do. But then didn't because his phone rang or he got faked out by the price action or blah, blah, blah.  Hindsight Harry is annoying, nobody likes hindsight Harry, he bothers a heck out of people, he talks to you because he has a negative mindset that emphasizes past outcomes when he should be focused on process. In the future.  Clear your mind of past trades and focus on the next opportunity. Good Traders. Thoughtfully review. Their decisions in Quiet Moments long after the fact bad Traders say what a could and should have  As Don Meredith, the American Football announcer and player, for the Dallas Cowboys. Once said,  if ifs and buts were candy and nuts, we'd all have a Merry Christmas.  Positive trait, 13 healthy skeptic.  Healthy skepticism is the ability to question the wisdom of the crowd common knowledge and experts while still maintaining the ability to incorporate information from respected sources. People, sometimes confuse cynic with skeptic and it's important to know the difference.  The modern definition of cynicism is someone who's bitter motivated by self-interest and or distrustful of humanity in general. This is an unhealthy approach for markets as it leads to a persistently negative, inflexible and bearish worldview. Skeptic comes from the ancient Greek, skeptic, meaning thoughtful inquiring Ori. Consider it means someone who requires strong evidence before accepting a belief or claim, skepticism is good.  If someone tweets stocks are up 11 Mondays in a row, the healthy skeptic reads that tweet winners. If it's true gathers, the data and verifies the claim  through this investigation, the trader might also discover other patterns in the data. Tuesdays, are up. Even more Fridays, are quiet. Thursdays are busy Etc.  A less independent and skeptical, thinker retweets. The original possibly wrong information and plans to buy stocks at 8:00 a.m. on Monday.  When you receive information greet it, with healthy skepticism is the information. Accurate is the person or organization disseminating, the information biased are they always bearish or frequently too optimistic,  Are they trying to inform their readers or generate clicks?  Alpha Traders are healthy Skeptics. They require strong evidence before accepting a claim.  Don't believe the hype on CNBC ignore professional forecasters. Double check, any claim. Someone makes unfined to it. Much of the information out there is biased or wrong.  And that concludes our review of the cognitive traits from the first 2 Columns of the table in the PDF. Now, we're going to move on to the third column non-cognitive traits  Non-cognitive traits.  What cognitive traits like intelligence rationality quantitative skill and properly calibrated confidence are crucial for training success. There are many non-cognitive traits that are equally important before we dig in. Here's the complete list of traits. We're going to cover 1 discipline and self-control.  2 adaptation.  3, courage, 4, self-awareness, 5, ability to handle stress 6, Focus, 7 patients. And 8, locus of control.  First, discipline and self-control.  Discipline and self-control are facets of conscientiousness and are crucial to trading success. It's easy to learn the rules of trading, but if you don't follow them, you will fail.  Many sophisticated intelligent and knowledgeable Traders fail because of poor discipline and bad self-control.  The fight to remain disciplined and fully in control of our actions, is 1 of the great challenges faced by every human being, we all know that exercise and healthy diet Will Keep Us slim and healthy. Most people want to be slim and healthy yet, 71.6% of us adults are overweight or obese.  Understanding what needs to be done and doing what needs to be done? Are 2 completely different things.  Self-discipline is the greatest Edge in every aspect of life, Health, Fitness education, Career, Success, productivity, marital longevity. And of course, trading the Will require discipline improve your current level of discipline and you will increase your future levels of happiness and success. It's true in life and it's true in trading.  To start understand where you are on the Continuum of self-control. What score did you give yourself in the quiz? From chapter 1 row age.  If you're low in this category, as I am, this is the place to focus the smartest Trader in the world will not succeed. If she has terrible self-control,  there are many trades and characteristics and ideas in this book. But if you have a problem with self-discipline, I would make fixing that your first priority take action and learn to become more disciplined. Here are some suggestions on how to do that.  How to level up yourself discipline.  First, if you have poor self-discipline admit it then create systems to deal with it too many people. Just hope they'll be stronger and more disciplined next time creating friction to prevent unwanted actions and automated Desirable habits.  Second Outsource discipline as much as possible. For example, every time you put on a trade load up an automated stop-loss right away.  If you have a team that works for you, keep your hands off the buttons and let them get you in and out of Trades. According to parameters, you set in advance, remember that. Once you put a trade on the bias kicks in, you often start to overthink overreact and overanalyze.  Stick with the parameters you selected When you entered automate or Outsource the stop loss and take profit so that you do not over trade.  3 create a clear set of risk management, rules and keep them as simple as possible. If you have a daily stop loss of 100,000, it's easy to know when you're done for the day. On the other hand, if you use a very complex set of rules, governing your risk management and have no clear eject button. You're more likely to crash.  Always have either a daily weekly, or monthly stop-loss or all 3. To manage risk of ruin.  4, meditate, or do yoga a mind in a state of agitation has less self-control and less willpower learn about mindfulness.  5 read books about willpower and self-control. It's a trait that is innate to some extent, but can also be built willpower rediscovering. The greatest human strength by Roy Bicester. And John tourney, is excellent. As are the science of self-discipline by Peter Hollands and the disciplined Trader by Mark Douglas.  6, when you're done reading these books, create a short list of takeaways 2 or 3 actions, you plan to take to improve your process and become more disciplined. Keep things as simple as possible.  And finally get a coach. There are many levels of coaching available for Traders when I worked at a hedge fund. We had a coach that came in once a month and I found the process very useful.  I found I did most of the talking and the coach prompted me and helped me find my way. There are online trading Coaches available too. But do your homework before hiring someone.  A majority of the trading advice coaching lessons, seminars and products available online are worse than worthless.  They're often scams or borderline scams frauds, offered up by individuals with marketing, not trading skills.  Good trading. Coaches. Have some combination of experience in Psychology, performance, science, and trading. Do some due diligence before you hire a trading coach,  The next trait to discuss is adaptation.  Many Traders are good in a specific type of Market. Some are good. Breakout Traders, arrange, Traders or flow Traders. Maybe they do well when stocks are falling, but not when stocks, rally some Traders were great before the Algos but have no idea how to trade. Algo driven markets.  The challenge is that markets are always changing if you're really good at 1. Type of Market, it's almost guaranteed. You'll be a dinosaur at some point. Adaptation is such an important part of long-term trading success that I devoted an entire chapter to it. See chapter 14 for a full discussion of why and how excellent Traders adapt.  The next trait is courage.  Good trading requires courage. You need to be able to put on positions that go against what common knowledge, media hype. And the smart guy on TV are saying you need to take positions big enough that they make you feel legitimately at risk. If things go wrong, you need to be able to drive the car fast enough to win the Grand Prix, but not so fast. You slam into the wall.  Optimal risk. Appetite is the narrow balancing point between tight risk. Averse white knuckling and sloppy overtraining. There's no such thing as a perfect trade. When you see a setup that looks amazing, commit, the maximum capital possible under your risk management framework.  I use a 3-level system for conviction and risk. Allocation will go in depth on sizing and conviction in chapter 11. But for now just know that when When it comes to your highest conviction trades, you should have enough risk on to make you feel uncomfortable, but not out of control.  The biggest size you think, is still rational whether or not that makes your knees weak if it makes your knees wobble a bit but the math is rational, that's perfect.  Varying bet size. When huge opportunities come along is an important determinant of trading success.  Changing bet size is the way card counters, beat the dealer in blackjack. They look for opportunities with abnormally, good odds, and then make large bets on those events.  Obviously, the big difference with trading is that you don't know the odds of any trade, you can only estimate them,  But if you see a trade that you believe, as a 90% chance of success and a payout of 2 to 1, you need the courage to bet big.  Good Traders, understand the importance of varying bet size based on opportunity Market volatility and their current performance, bad Traders. Always trade the same position size regardless of the opportunity, set volatility or pno Remember, there's a Continuum from chicken to Crazy. You need to be courageous, but not Reckless risk. Of Ruin is the number 1 risk, to manage, not risk of missing out. Not risk of falling behind budget or Benchmark. Not risk of underperforming. The guy next to you.  Take meaningful courageous risk but never look into the abyss.  Note that risk appetite for an individual is not constant many Traders. Behave differently under different conditions. Here are 3 effects that influence Trader risk. Appetite 1, the zero bound affect traders that are down on the ear tend to trade more nervously than traders who are up. If you're up 4 million on the year and dropped to 2.5 million, which is a loss of 1.5, that will feel different from going from plus 1, to minus 0.5.  You need to have the courage to take smart risk even when you're down.  2 end of period, affect Traders, tend to take less risk at the end of the year. If a Trader had a good year, they want to bank it. If they've had a bad year, They don't want to make it worse. This effect is why most hedge funds will not pay out more than once per year.  Hedge funds that Institute twice yearly payouts. Find that Trader. Risk appetite drops in both June and December instead of just in December.  And 3 house money effect.  Traders that are massively profitable in a given period, will tend to take on extra risk? This is known as the house money effect. A bias that shows up in both experimental and real world settings. The house money effect is especially strong immediately after large gains and it dissipates over time.  How's your risk appetite?  How did you score yourself on the Continuum from risk averse to sometimes reckless in the chapter 1 quiz row? A  If you scored 7 or 8, you're probably in The Sweet Spot below. 7, you're probably not taking enough risk and could be trading below potential 9 or 10, you may well be overtrading or pushing too hard.  Here's a quick discussion of different risk, appetite scores. What they mean and how to address problems related to specific ranges.  I suggest you listen to all the sections, regardless of your risk, appetite score because there are tips and anecdotes in each section that apply to everyone.  Risk appetite Score 1 to 4 risk, averse Trader?  More Traders than you would expect fall into the 1 to 4 range. That's okay. You can still succeed in trading, if you risk averse, but don't be in denial.  Be self-aware and be honest about your score, a score between 1 and 4 signals. You are risk, averse Trader.  Even if your risk appetite score is higher than 4, please listen to this section.  The risk of Trader.  1 is afraid to lose money. It's impossible to trade successfully, if you're afraid of losing money, you'll always be weak. If your fear comes from within, you need to work on it. If your fear comes from inadequate capitalization, the irony, is this, your fear of losing money, means you're going to lose all your money? Wait until you are adequately capitalized and find another source of income until then Traders with 2 little Capital end up gambling. The biggest real risk in trading is that you will lose money. You need to understand and accept this risk before you can have any chance of success as a professional.  Number 2, the risk averse Trader has trouble pulling the trigger. Number 3, always looks for the perfect trade number 4 needs many things to align before. Trading 5 often feels much more comfortable. Having the same position as a manager. Or peers rarely takes the opposite position.  And 6 looks for an excuse to take off a trade. As soon as she puts it on, she'll say things like ah, I should have gone up by now or it's not trading well or I don't like the price action or this idea isn't working even when the security is barely moved. So you'll take a tiny loss or tiny profit using any possible excuse because fundamentally she is risk averse. And her subconscious would prefer not to have the position or any POS. Position, there's a difference between taking risk and putting on positions, if you're always on edge, the second, you put on a position. You need to think about how to develop staying power.  Tips for risk, averse Traders. First of all, plenty of good Traders are risk-averse. They have many of the skills necessary to succeed in trading and this is their main weakness. It's not the hardest weakness to overcome but it requires a short list of rules that must be followed religiously.  1 sentiment risk size for every trade with the aggressive Traders. You more worried about maximum dollars at risk with risk, averse Traders, you need to set minimums much as there is a speed limit on every highway. There is also a lesser known minimum speed on most roads. If you're trading from home with the thousand dollar account, risking a hundred dollars to make 200, is not going to move the needle in. That example, a Trader could set a minimum of at least $500 of risk per trade 1,000. If it's a high-quality idea, minimum risk amount, Ensure that you extract maximum value from your good ideas.  Be thoughtful about what is a reasonable minimum. If your bank Trader trying to make 10 million of alpha in a year, risking 30,000, to make 50,000 is a waste of time, unless you can find many of these trades each day.  Reverse engineer, your minimum dollars at risk per trade using your monthly or yearly p&l objective.  Here's an example.  Your trading from home and you want to make 250,000 next year. You make money 50% of days and lose money, 50% of days, your average winning day is 1.6 times your average losing day toss this into a spreadsheet and keep changing the average winning day amount. Till the year total is 250,000. That gives you a starting point for how much risk you'll need to take.  And in the PDF, there's a table that shows you how to do that.  This concept can also be relevant to Traders with high risk, appetite scores when I first worked at a hedge fund. Felt like a kid in a candy store because instead of just FX, I was able to trade every Financial instrument Under the Sun, I could trade, oil wheat, bonds silver, whatever else I wanted.  At first, this led me to dabble in many markets it was a great learning experience but I found that I did a poor job of risk managing trades in secondary markets because they were much smaller than my Corps trades.  I'd be risking dollars on an fx trade but I might only risk 50,000 on an oil trade at first because I felt I didn't know the market as well.  Thus when an oil trade went against me, I tend to show poor discipline because the p&l impact was minimal. I dragged my stop lower or even just cancel it because the loss just didn't really hurt. In contrast, when a trade went my way, I had trouble taking profit at my Target because the gain didn't feel big enough. I might say to myself, man. That was a great idea, but I only made 6,500,000 not even worth the mental Capital. Maybe I can stretch it to 100,000, at least make it worth the effort. Needless to say, after hitting the target oil, reverse and I would cut at a small loss.  My trading in these products, improved substantially, when I set risk minimums for non-core markets, instead of dabbling in oil, or silver or other features, I would only enter if I had a strong View and was willing to take meaningful risk, say $200,000 or more. If my normal risk size and FX was $300,000 this ensured. 3 things a high conviction before entering a secondary Market because meaningful Capital was at stake. B, proper attention to the position and rigorous risk management since the position was big enough to matter and see no 2, small positions in non-core markets to distract or waste mental capital.  Rule number 2 for risk. Averse Traders is do not take off a trade, tell the stop-loss take profit or some other predetermined reassessment trigger is hit.  I'll explain the meaning of reassessment trigger throughout this book. The risk averse training, Jersey's danger at every corner and his consciously or subconsciously looking for excuses. To end the discomfort of being in a trade and get back to the relaxed state of flat.  remember to be an alpha Trader, you need to be okay with feeling uncomfortable, sometimes  If you're a risk averse Trader or you're managing a risk averse Trader, simply Institute a rule, when you put on a trade list, the reasons you will take it off. Stop loss, take profit, hit of course.  Time triggers are fine. As long as they're determined in advance.  For example, I will reassess at 4 p.m. today if it's a day trade or at 3 p.m. Friday. If it's a multi-day trade, these are called reassessment triggers.  All reassessment triggers should be determined ahead of time. Any other reason to take off a trade is not acceptable. It looks bad. It's not going down some other Market. Just blipped higher Etc.  These are not good reasons to reduce risk.  Once you take a position, you are a gigantic drooling by a monster. Your weaknesses are multiplied by 10 when you're in a trade.  Set specific rules that will restrict your actions when the inevitable discomfort kicks in learn to live with the Discover it, that's what real risk feels like have courage. Stop white knuckling, every trade, put the trade on and let it cook. Don't take it off till 1 of your ex ante triggers hits.  Another tactic for risk, averse Traders is to use trade quotas set a number of Trades that you plan to do in a given period and stick to it.  Your first instinct might be you will what if they're not that many opportunities but there's always opportunities if they're lower conviction opportunities than just size them appropriately.  The quota you set for yourself is highly contingent on your trading style, but if you're a short-term Trader, but not a day trader or high-frequency Trader, you might set a minimum of say, 3 trades per week. This forces you to get engaged and take risk, even when you're uncomfortable doing. So,  Sure it might put you in a few lower EV trades. But the trade-off is necessary to ensure. You don't spend too much time under invested on the sidelines.  A basketball player who always waits for the perfect shot. Might shoot 100% from the field and score 4 points in a game. That's not good as a coach. You want that player to take 15 shots and Miss 5 and score 20 points.  Traders who are risk-averse, do not take enough shots. So implementing a quote out forces them to find a better place on the continuum.  Risk appetite score 5 to 7, moderate risk taker.  If you give yourself a 5 6 or 7 on the Continuum of risk averse to risk, seeking, you can probably up your game. Your risk aversion is not a weakness but you might be able to stretch yourself a bit and avoid an early career plateau.  In the early 2000s, I worked for a bank that was generally risk. Averse, they ran a risk business model, that is surprisingly common, in Banks, take risk, but don't lose money. This is the optimal business model for a manager that wants to protect the bank. But also allow for a bit of upside if trading conditions are optimal.  This same business model is employed by many pod-based hedge funds. If you have a 100 trading with very tight stops but some of those Traders are still able to generate 20% returns in a year, the overall returns in sharp ratio of the hedge fund will be outstanding.  Some Traders hate this business model because it makes them nervous taking risk without losing money. Sounds like an oxymoron, it really isn't it just means that you need to behave like a call option. Take as much risk as you want when you're profitable but play extremely tight. When you are not, this is a logical approach for any conservative senior manager, who views the Traders working for him as a portfolio. It's a good business model, even if it's not the most fun 1 to work in for Traders with very strong risk appetite.  The moderate risk taker thrives in that sort of model because they deliver exactly what management wants. Decent upside with limited downside,  I've generally been fairly flat. Flexible in my Approach. But I definitely have concluded that this is the optimal strategy for most Traders, increase your risk. When you have a strong p&l base and decrease your risk when you're near or below zero.  This substantially reduces risk of Ruin allows for the right tail and offers you the best chance at long-term success.  The trader with risk appetite in the 5 to 7 range. Struggles to produce the right tail of the distribution though, because they will more likely be satisfied. Once they hit their budget or goal.  This is the kind of Trader. I was when I worked at that. Generally risk averse bank. I mentioned, if my budget was 5 million and I got there 8 months into the year I was encouraged to bank it or ring the register or take it easy into year end.  This makes sense on some level but greatly reduces your ability to see what kind of Trader you can be because despite the risks of the house money effect, most Traders are at their best when they have a big base of p&l to work with but can remain patient. And on the lookout for great opportunities where the A big bet.  Given the incentives and guidance for management. At that bank, I acted like a Trader with risk appetite of 5 or 6. Even though my true risk appetite is much higher high enough that it tends to be a weakness when I'm not at my best.  When I went to Lehman Brothers, in 2006, I had a great start to the year. My budget was 6 million, and I was up more than that by March. I went to my boss at the time and asked him how he felt I should proceed. I gave him the explanation of how things went at my last job, how they would tell me to take it easy Once. I hit my budget, steam came out of his ears. No way. Dude, this is your chance to see what kind of Trader you are. You have 6 million dollars in the bank set a stop-loss at 3 million and go turn that 6 into 10.  I sat there thinking for a bit and he waved me out of his office.  Go go. Make money.  That year I made $50 million and I'm forever thankful to that manager for teaching me that lesson.  The lesson was not, you have money in the bank, so go gamble it. The lesson was when you're in a strong capital. Position with chunky piano, increase your risk. In a methodical way, try to blow through the ceiling.  The time to go for. It is not January 1, the time to go for it is when you have money in the bank and markets are full of opportunity,  When you take this approach, it's crucial that you remain aware of downside and draw down set a point at which you will go back to a more defensive approach. In the case, outlined above, I was up 6 million and my go back to defensive level was 3 million. This gives you ammo to push hard when you're doing well, but also defines your downside. So you don't just blow through all the money you've made.  This idea of pushing hard when you're in a strong position is 100% contingent on the opportunity set. You don't just push because you're doing well, you push because you're doing well and there are great opportunities.  Wait, wait, wait wait. Then pounce  Traders with risk. Appetite scores in the 5 to 7 range need permission and opportunity to push hard when And they're doing well, if you are managing a Trader like this, push them to push themselves. Ask them. Do you want to see what kind of Trader you can be? This is your chance.  If you scored between 5 and 7 on risk, appetite, here are some things to try.  As described above, when you reach a p&l threshold, where you would have been satisfied in the past. For example, at budget above budget, best year to date ever, and it's only August, Etc. Don't look at it as an opportunity to chill.  Think about it amount you could lose that would still leave you in a strong position.  If your budget was 4 and you're Up 3 in April, say to yourself, I'm going to wait for a really good opportunity or series of opportunities. Trade extra aggressively until I draw back down to 2 million. In other words, I'm going to be very aggressive with 1 million of my piano. If I see trades. I believe in  If you draw back down to 2 million reset and slow down. But if you're able to risk that 1 to make 3D you find yourself up 6 million and it's a June.  To be 100% clear on this. This is not mindlessly doubling down at a casino because you have 17 black chips in your pocket. This is increasing your bet size on high odds opportunities because you have the capital to do. So this is how you generate outsized returns without risk of ruin.  No matter what type of Trader you are, there will not be an infinite number of years, where you start the year, very strong and the trading environment is favorable, when the stars align like this be courageous. Go for it. If you draw down to your predetermined Point, that's okay. Trading is about risk. Sometimes you'll be wrong and you will lose that's trading. Can you hunker down? Start building up the piano once again.  Another thing to try, if you're in the 5 to 7 range and have been doing okay, increase all your risk parameters by a fairly small increment. Say 20%,  If you're normally trading 200, e minis, go to 240.  if your home Trader, risking 1% of capital as your daily stop-loss, Increase it to 1 and a half percent of capital.  If you're a bank Trader, you usually trades. 20 million euros, tried 24 million.  This is something you should do when you are confident and trading. Well, incremental risk increases break you out of the habit of sizing your positions, the same all the time.  Many Traders, establish a comfort level and standard position size and never move away from it. If you work at a hedge fund, you're often forced to change position size as your Capital increases, but if you work at a bank or at home, you can feasibly trade the exact same position size for years at a time.  To grow. You need to keep gradually increasing risk. Till you either hit capacity, constraints. A significant problem when it happens, but not a concern for 99% of Traders.  Or until you reach the maximum allowable position for your Capital base.  Position sizing is discussed in Chapter 11.  Depending on your Capital base, you may already be running the largest possible positions given your risk framework. If you're a homebased Trader, with a 1 million account and you've determined that 3% of capital is the right daily stop-loss for you and you're hitting your stop loss once a week. That's too much. If you hit it once per year, you're probably too risk-averse. Your variance is probably too low and you can up your risk.  Trading is always attention between taking the most possible risk to make the most possible money when you're right and taking small enough risk that you don't blow yourself up when you hit a string of bad ideas.  Think about where you are on this. Continuum, most traders that I've seen could take more risk. Some including myself, would do better if they took less.  And that brings us to the other end of the risk. Appetite Spectrum, risk appetite score 8 to 9 strong risk appetite.  A Trader with a risk appetite score of 8 or 9 has the most upside but also requires more supervision and has more downside risk than a Trader with a lower score.  I would say the sweet spot for risk. Appetite is somewhere in the 7.5, to 8. Area though, Traders with very high scores, when harnessed can deliver Blockbuster returns, then again, they can be scary to watch sometimes.  A Trader with strong risk, appetite needs rules. If you're in this category, develop specific but simple rules to regulate your desire to take risk.  All of the following limits should be clearly defined and deemed to be Unbreakable.  1 maximum daily monthly and yearly loss. This can be a formula based on total capital and current pnl, depending on trading style, the liquidity of products traded and time. Horizon daily stops are not appropriate for many Traders. There's a full discussion of risk management in Chapter 11,  2 per minute, products and strategies can a hedge fund PM, sell volatility with unlimited downside, for example,  Can a home day trader short, low price stocks, can an fx Trader, take a position in a pegged or managed Asian currency.  Depending on where you trade. This question may not be. It's an esoteric question that does not come up all that often, but can be the difference between blowing up and not blowing up.  Many of the blow-ups that I've witnessed firsthand have been the result of Trades where the trader never should have been trading that product in the first place.  Hedge fund, managers risking 24 basis points to make 1 on Bank of Canada Day. Retail day, Traders going short, a thinly traded biofarma stock.  Options Traders selling topside dollar, cnh volatility, retail FX pairs going long Euro Swiss at 1 1210.  These are all blow ups caused by Traders dealing in products that they never should have touched.  If your day trading from home, what stocks are fair game?  The way you answer this question might be the difference between long-term success and instant nuclear Devastation of your trading account? See, GameStop shorts, for example.  Number 3, you should have a maximum position size byproduct.  and number 4 cooling off levels if a Trader draws down X, From high water or over earns by why she should enter a 2 or 3 Day cooling off? Period, during cooling off periods. All risk is cut in half this helps stabilize p&l after week periods. And avoids Winters, tilt after strong periods. If a Trader has enough experience pnl history and self-awareness to know, she does not suffer from Winters tilt or overconfidence after very strong periods. The top side cooling off levels can be excluded cooling. Off levels are different from stop losses on the downside as they relate more to bad streaks and drawn down from Peak not absolutely levels of pno.  And risk. Appetite score 10 too much risk appetite.  If you gave yourself a score of 10 on risk appetite, you need to be careful. You're probably in the sensation seeking training for excitement or gambling category training can be a lot like gambling. If you want it to be and it has similar dopamine payoffs. If you have an addictive personality along with the rules, I listed above With the risk appetite score of 10. Need to honestly analyze their motivation for trading and be self-aware. Enough to know whether they are acting more like Finance professionals or gambling addicts.  Traders on the extreme end of the risk-taking spectrum, use trading as another method of sensation seeking. This is not good. We'll talk much more about trading for fun. Instead of prophet in Chapter 7,  That concludes the discussion on risk appetite. Now, let's go back to the non-cognitive traits. That Define the alpha Trader.  Chapter 5 continued.  The next positive trait, we're going to discuss is decisiveness.  Good Traders are decisive.  I want to acknowledge here, I know there's overlap between many of the traits. I described in this section.  in fact, as I stated much earlier, most of them fall under the Big 5, psychological, Trade of conscientiousness.  Risk appetite courage and decisiveness are all similar personality facets. I could have bumped them all under risk appetite, but I wanted to dig deeper and unpack some subtle distinctions  So yes, decisiveness is like courage and risk appetite. But here, I mean, it more as a specific ability to press buttons. Once you have an idea trigger happy versus gunshy  Do you find it easy to put on a trade? Once you have a good idea or do you have hesitate?  Does this hesitation lead to worse entry points and tactical weakness, or is it healthy calibration and impulse control?  If you gave yourself a 10 out of 10 score on decisiveness, there's a good chance you're to impulsive overconfident or both.  Here's how I would describe the Continuum from 1 hesitant to 10 decisive.  1 through 4 2.  you're probably leaving, good trades and good money on the table as you Failed to pull the trigger, force yourself to do a certain number of Trades per day or per week as described in my quota System earlier.  This takes away, the should, I shouldn't? I hesitation, because knowing you have to do X trades this week. The decision has already been made. The question, then just becomes which trades to do not whether to trade.  Another exercise to help short-term Traders. Get more comfortable, hitting the buttons and trading more frequently and with less hesitation is to make markets.  If you're a day trader at home, put a small bid and a small offer in the same stock 3 cents apart.  When both sides trade do it again, set a stop loss in case it blows through 1 side of your price and keep putting in 2-way prices for an hour or so, this is also a good way to get quicker on the keys. If that's relevant to your trading style, if you trade headlines, for example,  Finally, get a trading coach. This does not have to be a huge financial or time commitment. You can meet a trading coach once per month and communicate with him by email once a week. Talking out loud about trading related issues can be valuable.  Thoughts Buzz around in your head and sometimes makes sense. And sometimes do not a conversation, can help you identify and unpack, the issues that cause your hesitation  while trading coaches often have a psychology background. The most important part of talking to a trading coach, is the talking not the psychology expertise.  Putting your thoughts concerns and weaknesses out in the opening clarifies them and will help you deal with them A co-worker or experienced Trader, you know, can most likely offer nearly as much help as a trained psychologist. That's been my experience anyway.  Decisiveness score 5 through 7 probably a bit too hesitant but still nothing to worry about. Think about whether your waffling on good ideas. What exactly do you need to get over the line and put on a trade? Are you waiting for confirmation from others? When you To come up with a trade idea. Do you feel better if you run a past, a few other Traders before executing try? Not to look for validation from others, own your ideas and remember that if other people agree with your idea, that does not necessarily make it better, it may mean it's a popular idea with less upside than a unique or contrary trade idea that nobody likes.  A score of 7 or 8 is The Sweet Spot decisive but still cautious enough to understand that, not every shiny object has value able to hit the buttons when a headline comes out. But also able to not hit the buttons and 9 or 10. Probably trigger happy risk of overconfident and impulsive trading. If it's too easy to decide and pull the trigger every time, perhaps you need to hesitate a bit more,  Most likely, you should filter at some trades and focus on your best ideas.  Decisiveness is great, but think about whether it is possible, you are too. Decisive, maybe you need to filter your ideas a bit more and either reduce Booster number of trades or at least be sure to size your best trades, much larger than the others.  Traders with a score of 9 or 10. Indecisiveness probably have a hard time ignoring random headlines and feel the urge to trade on every bit of news news. Sounds a lot like noise.  The next positive trait for Traders that we're going to discuss is self-awareness.  Good Traders are self-aware.  Part of the intent of this book is to make you more self-aware and more honest about your strengths and weaknesses as a Trader. There's no shame in having low scores on some Dimensions. Nobody possesses all positive characteristics. In abundance better to admit you are risk, averse, and trade accordingly than pretend your name is Gordon, Gekko, or dollar bill.  The number 1, way to build and cultivate self-awareness is to maintain a trading journal.  This is such a cliche of trading advice, but that's because it's true. You can Journal individual trade Or individual days or just sporadic thoughts, keep a document or spreadsheet open in the background and note, what you are doing.  I'll tell you this upfront, keeping a journal is a tough Habit to maintain. It's a huge pain in the butt and 2 things tend to happen. Either a you start trading really well and you get in the zone and you can't be bothered. Updating your Journal because you feel like a trading God or B, you keep losing money and you get worn down. And the last thing you want to do is spend 20 minutes journaling, what happened. Because all you really want to do is Bolt out of the office and go meet some friends for a gin and tonic  It's extremely difficult to maintain a trading journal habit, but it is worth it and just because it's difficult, that's no excuse. Not to do it very few, highly productive habits are easy to maintain, remember that if trading was easy, it would not pay so well,  What trick that works for, any difficult to maintain habit, like, lifting weights, or not smoking, or keeping a trading journal? Is to find a partner who wants to do the same thing. If you promise to exchange 1 paragraph, a day with a friend, you're not just letting yourself down. If you get lazy, you're letting down your friend as well.  If you think I'm going to lift weights today at 10:00 a.m., that's much less powerful than setting. An appointment to meet your friend and lift weights at 10:00 a.m. Most people find it easier to let themselves down and we'll work harder to do the right thing for a friend or acquaintance for that matter.  This can also be handled with the professional trading coach on the most basic level. A trading coach, can simply be there to help enforce your daily regimen like a personal trainer. A coach can keep you on track and help you enforce. The good habits that you don't quite have the willpower to enforce yourself.  This section is about self-awareness. If you know, you are not good at forming, strong habits find a way to get 1 paragraph of journaling out every day somehow someway  A trading journal helps you keep track of emotions biased. Themes and thoughts. There are many ways that a journal can help. You can take 2, basic forms. 1 is a trade by trade Journal. If you're new to trading. I recommend this approach a free form approach is fine, for more experienced Traders, but a more granular system will help new Traders collect more data.  The more data you collect, the more likely you will learn something from your Journal.  Think about areas where, you know you are weak and see if you can come up with data, that might reveal your progress in that area.  In the PDF, there's a sample trading journal that I created in a spreadsheet. A trading journal is the most direct route to trading self-awareness ideas become concrete when you write them down by recording, each trade, along with the rationale and thought process, you can pick up on recurring errors, problems or leaks in your Trading.  Thoughts or abstract and fuzzy writing is concrete and solid.  Often the process of writing things down, will bring out new ideas and thoughts. It will lead to different results as Daniel boorstin. Once said I write to discover what I think,  sit down and do a deep dive into your trading journal every month or so see if you can find meaningful. Takeaways. For example, do you stick to your plan? Does your risk reward at Inception, come close to your actual risk reward if not why?  Are there any consistent features of your good or bad trades? Time Horizon asset class conviction level.  Did you hit your stop-loss more often than usual? This might be a sign that your positions are too big or the volatility regime has changed and you have not adapted.  Once you have your takeaways set 1 goal or 2 at most to address a leak or issue. You've discovered, I'm a big believer in working on just 1 or 2 measurable and achievable goals at a time. Let me explain.  when I was a senior manager at a bank, we used a formal corporate goal setting system and usually it allowed for somewhere between 5 and 15 goals to be entered. I found that was just way too many goals for me to supervise or coach as a leader, and way too many goals for an employee to manage as an individual.  I eventually instituted my own 1 goal system. I told the people that work for me that all those goals in the corporate system were great but all I cared about was their 1, most important goal. I asked them to email me that goal and explain why it was important and how they plan to achieve it.  This was effective, I saw much more impact from this 1 goal system that I ever saw from more formalized multi-goal systems.  So after reviewing your trading journal, come up with a goal, something fairly short term, a few months. At most another feature of good goals is that their specific and not too long term. If you get set a goal that covers the next month or 2, that's much easier to achieve.  you're more likely to succeed with a goal, like I will not drink any soda for the next month, then with I'm never going to drink soda again.  Chunking into smaller achievable and short-term goals, develops habits and process that will lead to achievement a bigger picture longer term goals.  Here are a few hypothetical examples of useful takeaways or goals that might emerge after you analyze your trading journal.  1.  No, S&P futures trades for 30 days all the money I make and other assets, I give back with my irresistible urge to go short s&ps.  2, my trading journal entries are much more emotional than usual, Titan. Daily stop-loss to 15,000 my normal. Stop loss is 30,000 but I've been trading badly and I know I'm in a weird state of mind because my dad is really sick.  3. No trades between noon and 3 p.m.  Those trades hit 35% of the time versus 57% of all trades. Initiated outside that time frame.  Again, these are just examples 1 of the easiest ways to lose money in trading, is by hitting button. Somewhat randomly in response to stimulation from noisy price movement, this sort of thing.  Tesla rallies from 444 to 449 Tesla's. Rallying some must be going on. Whoa, it's breaking 450. There must be news out Trader. Buys, 300 shares at 450 and 70 cents. The high is 450 and 85 cents. The stock Fades down to 450 and 10 cents. It's losing momentum Trader frantically. Scrolls through Twitter, looking for positive Tesla. Headlines, Tesla drifts back down to 4:49 crap. That was dumb Trader, sells at 4:48 60 for a loss of 210 per share.  If you update your trading journal with every trade in real time, it's less likely you will put on pointless trades, like the 1.  first of all, as you fill in your trade journal in real time, you'll realize, you have nothing to put in the rationale box, um, because it was going up because I thought there might be a headline because fomo  Second once. Here in the habit of completing your trading journal. You'll become rooted in a process where you already know you need a decent rationale before entering a trade.  When, you know, you need a decent rationale to enter in your trade Journal that tightens up your filter, you avoid dumb noise trades because you know, as you move your hands toward the buttons, there's no good rationale. You don't hit buy or sell because you've developed good discipline.  Knowing that you're going to record every trade in a trading journal. Makes you more selective and logical when trading you're less likely to hit buttons for no good reason and get sucked in by the deafening noise. It also boosts your confidence once you're in the trade because you've clearly laid out your reasoning and it's solid.  Everything in your head is abstract, there's a ton of noise in there. Multiple competing voices with logic, ego mental, shortcuts bias, memory, and emotion, all competing for airtime.  When you record a plan, you filter out the noise and distill The Logical output.  The alpha Trader always has. Discipline.  A trading journal is not the only way to build self-awareness. Here are some other methods.  1 step outside yourself.  This sounds a bit weird and self-help, but it can be a powerful way to up yourself, awareness, sit there. Quiet your mind and imagine your rational self standing right next to you.  What do they think of your trading right now? This is a way of shutting down system 1 got and activating system 2 logic when you ask. What would my rational self? Think you break through the storm and noise of swirling thoughts and focus on The Logical. This is a important for active Traders because rapid trading activity, is more likely to be driven by quick decisions influenced by emotion and bias.  The key here is to slow things down and observe yourself and your actions rationally. If you identify a mistake, correct, it as quickly as possible, without much further thought.  Seeing yourself making a mistake is Step 1, but then you need to take it. Production and correct it. I've literally said out loud. I know this is a mistake but I'm doing it anyway. As I press buttons to enter a trade  I showed good self-awareness there, I guess, but it's clearly not good enough to Simply identify a mistake in action. 1. Needs to stop it before it happens.  You need to have the self-control and willpower to take over. When you see your dumb brain doing something, sub-optimal your dumb. Brain is the 1 that wants to yell squirrel. When it sees a squirrel, your smart brain is the 1 that resists impulses and takes control, try to be aware of the different layers of thought that go on in your mind and notice repeating patterns such as the urge to  Buy something, just because it's going up, do a trade because you are bored, exit, a good position because it's not moving or cut a position because you don't like the price action.  When you're self-aware, you understand the many pieces that make up the mental puzzle, your part intelligent, rational, thinker and part. Impulsive jump, B fight or flight, lizard knowing your smart. Brain is in control and notice yourself acting irrational and dumb comment on it then grab the steering wheel. Sorry dumb brain. You're not taking me where I want to go move over. I'm driving.  Next, think about your motivations. This is another way of building self-awareness, human beings are driven by incentives. What motivates you to succeed. The most reliable motivation is a strong internal desire to achieve external motivations like money proving yourself or outperforming the guy that sits next to you will not lead you to the promised land. This is well known in education. Circles intrinsic, motivation, crushes, extrinsic motivation.  In other words are you trading? Because you enjoy it you want to win and it satisfies you intellectually, or are you trading to get rich?  This is a complex question, given the instant feedback and direct monetary rewards of successful Trading. Research shows that if you dream of being rich, no matter how rich you get, you'll always wish you were richer. So pursuing money for the sake of money is a pointless goal.  There's a concept known as the hedonic treadmill which states that as human beings earn more money their desires and expectations rise in tandem so that no amount of wealth will lead to Greater happiness. Research shows this to be generally true. Once someone makes enough money to comfortably acquire shelter, clothing, Food, and Health Care, which is an annual income somewhere around. 75 K to 1255 per year. In most parts of the United States. Additional increases in income do not increase happiness, very much.  Harvard study of adult development, followed the lives of hundreds of people over 8 decades and found the happiest people were the ones that had the strongest and most durable relationships with Community, family, and friends.  Relationships predict, longevity, and happiness. Better than money intelligence. Or fame.  Making ten million dollars is not going to make you happy on its own, but if you truly love trading, it might, you should generally enjoy the process and act of trading.  You should find it, intellectually stimulating, exciting, and sometimes fun. You should look forward to going to work most days. If you don't you're doing it wrong, here's a quote from 1 of the great books on self-awareness, echart tolls, The Power of Now.  Quote.  See if you can catch yourself complaining in either speech or thought about a situation. You find yourself in what other people do or say, your surroundings your life situation, even the weather to complain is always non-acceptance of. What is it invariably carries an unconscious negative charge? When you complain, you make yourself into a victim. When you speak out, you are in your power. So change the situation by taking action or by speaking out of necessary or Poss.  Leave the situation or accept it all else is madness. End quote,  I highly recommend the Power of Now, the book is not directly related to trading, but it does offer Insight on mental skills. That help with good trading and good thinking specifically the book as you might guess from the title, is about a focus on the present. The now, good Traders, don't get mired in what ifs? They trade the market 1 day at a time and do not waste. Finite mental energy on thoughts of past outcomes or fears of an uncertain future.  Trading is not life or death. If you fail you will learn and the sun will rise tomorrow this is not an emergency. Heart surgery where failure is catastrophic maintain perspective. If you spend a stretch of more than 18 months of trading where you're mostly miserable, I would think about finding another role or another career.  Trading is not just about p&l, it's about learning personal growth, self-discovery, and self-improvement focus as much as possible on self. Self improvement process development and let the money take care of itself.  For the record, I found myself miserable on several occasions. And for me, it's always been about the role not the career.  If you work in an unpleasant setting, if you work for a manager that does not respect you, or does not know how to run a risk business. If you work for a firm that is extremely risk-averse or if you trade at home with insufficient capital or insufficient support from your family, the problem is probably the role not the trading.  If you're in a good firm and you like your manager or your trading independently, with plenty of capital, and you still dread sitting down in front of your computer in the morning, that's bad. Make a change.  If trading isn't Fun, most of the time you need to figure out why.  A third way to build. Self-awareness is morning prep. You do a quick morning prep and self-checking. You can simply fill out a quick 1 pager when you first sit down at the desk.  in the PDF, I show an example of what that might look like for a Day trader trading. The NASDAQ.  It takes about 2 minutes to complete. It's not a major task, it sets a professional and organized tone for the day and allows you to ask the key questions. This daily sheet as I call it forces you to log in on what's most important for the day, your mood, the market, and your plant to steal a term from mindfulness and yoga the daily sheet forces you to Center yourself before you start trading.  Complete your daily sheet, then take a few breaths, clear your mind Center your yourself, then go.  This is really important. Write a brief plan for the day before you start pressing buttons.  Training is a journey that can bring you wisdom. That will benefit your non-trading life by the same token, self-improvement efforts outside of trading can make you a better Trader.  we've scratched the surface of self-awareness here mostly as a pertains to trading pursue self-awareness as a Trader but also as a curious and growth-oriented human being embrace, Meditation, yoga exercise and other paths to self-awareness and you'll become a better Trader, a healthy body and a healthy self-aware. Mind will give you the endurance for long run survival in the market.  The next positive trait is the ability to handle stress.  Whenever people ask me, don't you find trading stressful? I reply yeah, but it's good stress like playing professional baseball stressful or flying a fighter jet. This stressful ensure the stakes are high but it's not life or death. It's important but it's not like for death.  Good Traders have the right perspective. They take the job seriously, but they do not allow it to consume them.  Trading is not who you are. It's what you do.  A fair bit of research has been done on the physiological impacts of trading the book The Hour between dog and wolf by John Coates covers the topic. Well when a human senses danger, the brain releases adrenaline and cortisol. This boosts the person's blood pressure and heart rate and prepares them to fight the lion or run from it. In our case, the threat is Market risk. So the problem is that the stress reaction is not temporary, it goes on and on.  The original purpose of our response to Danger was to allow for fight or flight. Either of which is meant to be a temporary burst of activity. Followed by recovery in trading, we can stay stressed all day, and eventually this puts strain on our digestive immune and other systems because we're flooded with cortisol,  Excessive cortisol can lead to poor memory, paranoia anxiety, and all sorts of bad stuff. That's why Traders burn out.  Nobody who's 24 years old believes, they can ever burn out people have experienced almost exclusively success in their early life. Can't imagine ever being tired or burnt out or failing,  but trading is exhausting. If you don't manage your stress level properly and stay somewhat healthy in your 20s and 30s. You Probably won't be trading in your 40s or 50s.  1 Trader. I work with had her Apple watch monitoring or heart rate as the FED announced its interest rate decision in August 2019 she had a ton of orders to watch and was at significant risk through the meeting.  In the PDF, there's a chart of her heart rate as it goes from 60, beats per minute, resting to 100 beats per minute on the FED announcement. It's a cool chart.  Here's how good Traders deal with stress.  First have perspective, like I said earlier we're not storming, the beaches of Normandy here, we're buying and selling Assets in an attempt to generate short-term profits. If you can take the job seriously and treat it as a profession, but still understand the sun will come up tomorrow no matter how well or badly you trade you can win.  Next. Relax, learn to relax and breathe. When you have big risk on, don't wait knuckle every trade and grind your teeth over every basis point jiggle.  You need to get come. Comfortable with being uncomfortable. This took me a long time but it's a nice State of Mind to have a ton of risk on and know that you can see the world clearly and breathe. This does not mean you don't care. It just means you put on risk before you'll put on risk again and this is just a single trial in a process with thousands of Trials, each trade is a spoonful of water in an ocean. Don't get riled up.  Third. Go off the desk, many Traders, hate to go off the desk because they're worried about missing something.  In the long, run, the benefits you gain from. Going off the desk, exceed the risk you take of missing something. When you go off the desk, your heart rate goes down. And you'll often experience, stunning moments of clarity. Every experienced Trader knows the feeling of that super clear Market Insight, that pops into your head when you're off the desk.  The human brain produces new ideas by creating connections between disparate thoughts and stimuli and it does this best when it is at rest to achieve Clarity and produce aha moments. Of trading Insight, sometimes you need to go off the desk and let your brain work.  Much in the way. Sleep allows your brain to process everything, you've experienced. During the day, pulling yourself away from the screens allows your brain to cool off and run some different less urgent sub routines.  Frequently heard on the trading floor, man. I just realized something really interesting on my way back from the bathroom.  The next tip for long-term survival and stress reduction is turn off your phone at night.  Checking your phone for 4 times, a night makes you feel important. And allows you to impress, your friends with your aggressive commitment to Capital markets. Checking your phone at night is more addiction than useful habit. Markets are always awake but you need time to rest. They'll be fine with you for a few hours. Leave a stop-loss and a take profit on every position you hold at night, then, turn off your phone and get some proper sleep.  I used to leave call levels in various currencies, and I get the call from Hong Kong or Tokyo, or London. At 2:30 a.m. this would result in wife annoyed young kids awake, no good trade since I had no idea what was going on in the market and was groggy and not in a strong position to make split-second decisions and much more tired. The next day because of elevated heart rate in the middle of the night and 60 Minutes of tossing, and turning and half awake dreams about Delian before finally falling asleep, 20 minutes before my alarm went off in the morning.  Eventually, I left instructions with all the other Centers, do not call me at night still even once I kick the call level have it. If I woke up to go to the bathroom, in the middle of the night, I was always tempted to check the market. Again, this is pointless, do not do it. Turn your phone off. When you go to bed, turn it back on when you wake up.  Took me many years to learn this and implemented and my health and Sleep Quality improved dramatically when I did.  Well, rested, outperformed sleep deprived.  It is common sense, but research also shows conclusively. That humans perform tasks at a substantially higher level when properly rested and we make persistent and frequent errors. When sleep-deprived  And finally, breathe.  Learn how to focus on your breath through meditation yoga or other mindfulness practices.  The ability to deal with stress is somewhat innate. But you can learn Stress Management and be thoughtful about your own reaction to pressure. Again, try to step outside yourself at times and make observations, hmm. I just smashed my fist on the keyboard. Maybe I should take a little walk, observe your own behavior and understand what it might mean. I have a huge lump in my throat and I want to yell this trade is getting under my skin in a bad way. I need to square up and start fresh tomorrow.  The struggle for self-awareness is a Timeless piece of The Human Condition. Greater self-awareness will help you in trading and will help you in real life.  Now, let's move on to the next non-cognitive trait on our list.  Focus. Alpha Traders maintain Focus, even when flaming arrows are raining down on the battlefield and everyone else is losing their mind.  Trading floors are quieter than they used to be, but there's still plenty of chaos when markets are on the move. There are moments when market makers need to watch multiple markets, yellow, accurate and tight prices to multiple sales people and execute trades in more than 1 asset. At the same time. This requires military-style, concentration and focus.  The sample size is small but 2 of the best traders that ever worked for me, came from the military. There's some overlap in terms of level of focus between trading and military operations, and anyone who's engaged in live gunfire is certainly not going to be scared off by a flash crash in Sterling, or a 7 standard deviation move in US. 10-year yields.  Another bonus when hiring ex-military into trading is that they're usually older and more mature than standard graduates. Thus, they are better prepared and more able to jump straight into a trading seat. 1 obvious tell when new analysts join us on the trading floor is whether they can process various streams of information. Simultaneously, some young recruits have this skill and some do not there have been times when 2 salespeople were yelling at me for a price at the exact same time and a junior analyst came right up to me and said, I'm getting coffees. Do you want 1 without even realizing I was engaged in multiple transactions? This sort of Market awareness, is hard to teach New Kids On a training floor. Either have it or they don't  I would therefore say that focus is 1 of the skills that is most innate and toughest to teach or upgrade. That said, here are a few things you can do to improve your trading Focus.  First schedule, all non-trading tasks either outside of work hours or in narrow uneventful Windows like 1:30 to 3:30 p.m. for equities or after 2:30 p.m. if you trade Commodities. I mentioned this earlier but it is a dumb mistake that even senior Traders make. I often made this mistake myself when I was running a large FX business and had around 50 people working for me,  Outlook meeting notifications popped up on my screen like fireflies, all day when I first started a management, but I realized the good trading hours need to be protected from outside distractions.  Your boss wants you to succeed. So don't be afraid to ask to reschedule or requests. You receive for an 8 a.m. meeting most meeting. Times are said somewhat arbitrarily explain to your manager or employees or wife or whoever  These hours are sacred and I need to be on the desk from X to Y. Any other time is fine.  Second, close your email during Peak trading periods.  If your main trading time is the equity open. Close your email from 9 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. answering emails 1 at a time as they come in distracts you over and over and over and over.  And 99% of them are completely useless. Emails and deal with them in batches every few hours, your efficiency and focus will improve. Also learn about inbox zero.  Third exercise, in some years. I've exercised like an athlete and stayed an outstanding shape. On the other hand. I've had a few multi-year periods where I could not fit, proper exercising to my schedule for whatever reason, the difference is glaring after a year or so of no exercise, my brain gets dull and hazy. I have trouble waking up in the morning and I'm dying for an app around 3 p.m. every day.  Optimal, mental performance, does not require you to be ripped V with 6-pack ABS, but it does require a minimal amount of physical maintenance. Few workouts per week, ideally combining weights and Cardio.  If you think you don't have the time to work out, make time I move my wake up time from 5 a.m. to 4 AM to allow time to work out and the extra energy I get from the exercise and the psychological benefits of exercise more than outweigh the hour of sleep. I lost get 1 hour earlier 3 days a week it's worth it unless you have a newborn baby or a sick relative or some truly extenuating situation. You need to make time to exercise its a big part of playing the long game successfully.  Fourth stretch stand up and walk around a bit, take short breaks away from the desk. This gets the blood flowing, resets your mind and forces you out of mental ruts, change your perspective and breathe a bit. This can be a 3 minute. Stroll sounds so simple. But many Traders stay welded to their chair for hours when they should be standing to stretch every few minutes.  you need to move around a bit to maintain physical energy and you need to get off the desk every now and then for a change of mental scenery,  And finally put your phone away. Many trading floors prohibit mobile phones for compliance reasons and 1 side. Benefit of this policy is that it removes a distraction. You can answer the text from your mom later.  Peak trading requires flow.  Flow happen. When you're in the zone and you process, all the incoming information in the most efficient way possible.  Remove as many distractions as you can from your point of contact with the market and be particularly brutal about protecting the most sacred hours of your trading day.  For many styles of trading that can be just 2 to 4 hours per day. Don't clutter up those crucial hours, close Facebook, put your phone in a drawer, shut out. Look and focus.  The next positive trait I want to talk about is patience.  When Traders very often use a style that also performs well in poker, the style is called tight aggressive. The idea is you play as tight as possible waiting for Clear opportunities where you have a substantial Edge and then act aggressively when those opportunities arise?  In poker. This means instead of lipping into many pots often with marginal, hands you wait for strong cards and strong position or large pots that will justify the risk of entering, Sharing with medium cards or weaker position.  In trading. This means, instead of trading every chart pattern, and support, and resistance, and up and down jiggle, random news headline, you wait for strong setups, where you have an edge and you commit significant Capital to the idea.  there's a great quote on this from Tony Robbins, who says the path to success is to take massive determined action  This is easy to say in an audiobook but much harder to execute in real life. What happens in real life is either a, the traitor is not disciplined enough to wait for high quality opportunities. She gets bored and puts too much money behind too. Many low-quality ideas or B. The trader is not courageous enough to commit to even the best ideas. So she puts out small bets even when there's a once per year type opportunity, then when the trade works out, exactly as expected. She winges about how she was way too small. And she knew this was going to happen.  well, I stated earlier that good trading requires courage, it also Requires patience. Most Traders have a bias to action and this can lead to poor trade selection and bad Capital, allocation. If you put money behind, every idea that pops into your head, the high-quality ideas will be diluted by the random dumb ones.  When I'm training. Well, I'm patient. I pick my spots and do fewer trades when I'm trading poorly. I react to every headline and chart pattern, and flicker of the numbers on the screen.  The key for me is to wait and wait and wait as long as possible, reject as many trade ideas as possible, till finally there's a trade idea. So juicy, I cannot resist and then I attack it.  Wait, until all the planets are aligned. You want to participate in trades where the macro story charts, positioning sentiment and cross market. Indicators all point in the same direction.  If you use 10 criteria for trade selection, you don't want to trade the ticks 2 boxes. You want the 1, that takes 8, but those trades don't come along every Few hours the way you wish they would so you need to wait. This is difficult in low volatility markets, where frequency of opportunity is lower.  Now, patients of course should not be confused with a bias to in action. This is where self-awareness is important. If you're biased to inaction, you need to be less patient since I'm always biased to action and overtrading, I need to be more patient.  Think about where you lie on that Spectrum an interesting though. Not very surprising pattern that emerges from my innate lack of patience. Is that my Sharp ratio is higher when I'm in the red versus when I'm deep in the black.  If I'm in the red for the year, or even for the month, my main goal is to avoid going deeper into the red. This is the zero Mound effect. I described earlier in the section on Courage,  Everyone has a point of discomfort as they near their stop loss and your goal is to stay away from that point of discomfort so that you are not weak when a huge opportunity or great trade idea, emerges. Therefore, I know that when I'm below zero on the year, I need to be selectively, I wait and wait and wait and then the I'll know it when I see it moment arrives. And I pounce often when I'm doing very well, my patients slips and I feel like I can afford to swing at some bad pitches. I get a bit sloppy and draw down before going back to basics and renewing my commitment to tight aggressive.  Even though I know my bias to action is a weakness, I still struggle with it. Some rough parts of your personality are easier to smooth than others.  A good Trader is like a leopard hiding in the Tall. Grass the cat will wait for long periods. Sometimes hours for the right opportunity to pounce. If he lunges too early or too late, he'll miss the kill, he waits and waits until the perfect moment and then attacks with 100% commitment and force,  The next non-cognitive attribute, we're going to talk about is locus of control.  Broadly speaking. Locus of control is a concept in Psychology that explains, how people see their own influence on the situations outcomes and experiences in their lives. In school, students with internal locus of control, believe, success or failure. Come from effort and hard work.  Students with external. Locus of control. Beliefs success or failure. Come from luck fate. Unfair or bad teachers bias and so on.  Students with internal locus of control by Blame A C grade on their own, poor preparation while students with external. Locus of control would blame the teacher or the test.  How do you view the outcomes and experiences in your life?  Do you take responsibility or blame external forces?  In life outside of trading, internal locus of control tends to lead to better outcomes. Because when people believe they can control their own life, they take ownership and do the necessary work to improve their situation, those who believe they don't control their Life, don't bother to try.  in games and Pursuits involving probability successful, participants understand what they control, and what they do, not  this is the entire message of a book like thinking in bets by Annie Duke if you focus on results instead of process, you fail to understand which part of the system you control and which part you do not  while strong internal. Locus of control generally correlates with positive life outcomes because those who believe they influence outcomes in their life tend to have stronger motivation. Make more effort. It can also lead to the illusion of control, many think other consciously or unconsciously that they have control in areas where they cannot possibly influence the outcomes.  A remarkable experiment by longer and Roth. Showed that students, who had success, predicting a coin toss early on tended, to believe, they had Superior coin toss prediction skills to those that did not, if people can convince themselves, their Superior forecasters of a coin toss, imagine how they might convince themselves of their Ability to predict markets longer and Roth reported their findings in heads. I win Tails its chance  I love the title because it captures the faulty thinking of many and overconfident Trader.  If I make money on the trade, I'm smart. If I don't, it was just bad luck. That's not rational thinking.  Example, 1, you're playing poker, you have 2 Aces and your opponent has a junk hand like 95 off suit.  The player with 95 is drunk and goes all in. And you obviously call The Flop is not 9 95, and you lose to the Full House.  Example, 2 a tennis player, hits a perfect shot down the line and the Umpire calls it out even though it was clearly on the line.  Example, 3 a baseball player hits a line drive. That looks like a clear home run, but the opposing center fielder clubs, the wall and grabs it for a very loud out. A professional poker, tennis, or baseball player in these situations will tend to understand that they did everything. They were supposed to do and ran into a very unfortunate bit. A bad short-term luck. They understand if you rerun the same event 1 million times, the result would be a success more than 99% of the time, they can shrug it off and understand that their process was good. And while the outcome clearly stuck, they have nothing to feel bad about.  On the other hand, a weak player or someone who does not understand process versus outcome or what they control versus what they do. Not control will be enraged. Can't believe that guy flopped a full house on the unluckiest person in the world. Etc. That's what any do calls resulting? When you focus on results, you fail to understand what you control. And what you do not control. This is a major fault in life trading, Sports, and everywhere. You need to understand what you control and what you do not  In trading, internal or external locus. Of control is not most important. What is most important is making the distinction between those things that we do and do not control. This is captured nicely in the Serenity Prayer, a moto popularized by Alcoholics Anonymous, but relevant to everyone.  It says, God grant me the serenity to accept the things. I cannot change courage to change the things I can, and the wisdom to know the difference.  That last line is key. Think about what parts of the system. You control, you control, the inputs not the outputs in trading. This means focus on, good thinking, and rational decision-making, and don't get upset when you hit a bad run.  Understand that variance is part of the game and you cannot and will not ever control it what you can control and change if necessary is your process and your attitude.  Nick Jonas, the Aussie Trader, I worked with, not the singer has this on a Post-It note stuck to his monitor at work.  quote, the only things I control are my effort and my attitude end quote  People waste way too much, time worrying about random stuff, they don't control. This is often true in trading but it is true out there in the world, too. A big part of My personal philosophy is to not waste time on things. I cannot control. For example, when I was younger, I'd spend months obsessing about what my bonus was going to be in January, as discussions, started in September, and expectations management took hold into October and November. I listened to all the speculation about the bonus pool, and tried to keep my ear to the ground, to get a sense of what my bonus play be.  As years passed, I realized something. If I come into work try my best and perform at a high level. The bonuses take care of themselves.  there's no correlation between how much you worry about, what your bonus is going to be and how much you get paid there, is though a strong correlation between your bonus and how hard you work, how well you prepare, how disciplined you are and what kind of attitude you have  This is the 22 word recipe for trading success.  Come into trade each day with a positive attitude. Do the work, Focus, behave, rationally, go home. Do it again tomorrow. Don't obsess over your month to date or year to date. P&l or the bonus pool or what kind of car, you might buy if you finish strong.  Don't waste time on what might happen if you flame out as a Trader and spill your entire account.  don't wonder why that guy got paid more than you or that woman got promoted or that dummy gets invited to all the client dinners and you don't  There's always someone doing better than you and there's always someone doing worse than you. Focus on yourself. Run your own race and ignore the runners in front and behind. You be better today than you were yesterday.  A bad poker player, constantly complains about bad cards or bad beats a good poker. Player knows that in the long run, her Superior skill will deliver outsized returns and short-term variance means nothing. A good Trader doesn't spend too much time upset when they get stopped out at the higher low, that's just something that happens sometimes.  The good Trader knows they'll be just as many times. They survived by a hair good and bad luck, even out. And the result at the end of many years is Not luck.  Other trades.  Like I mentioned earlier, it's a tricky exercise to place traits into cognitive and non-cognitive buckets in the end. I did my best but still I was left with a bunch of traits and factors that don't fall neatly into either category. These other traits and factors. I'll call Category 3 factors and I'll discuss them in this final section of chapter 5. They are 1, raw trading, Instinct 2, passion for trading 3 experience, 4 luck, 5, Apprentice capital and 6 a healthy risk-taking environment.  Raw trading instinct.  Trading instinct is what I call the X Factor, the thing that separates good from great.  When you watch American Idol, you can detect this X-Factor right away. The singer's voice, might not be the best you've ever heard. They might not be the best looking or best answer, but there's some hard to Define aspect that moves you most people will agree on who has this X Factor and who does not  There's a similar X Factor in trading. It's not just about risk, appetite or Quant scale or patients or discipline or any of the traits I mentioned. It's about instinct, when new Traders come to the desk out of an analyst program, it's easy to see when they have this X Factor, they intuitively get what's going on much more quickly than others. They don't ask questions, 15 seconds after a huge Market move because they understand when is the right time to converse. And when is the right time to keep quiet, they input tickets the right way. And can mentally calculate p&l on a trade quickly, without making a series of tortured faces first. They understand the metagame and know that if 10 separate Banks recommend short oil on the same day, that's not bearish oil.  In 8, trading skill, varies dramatically for person to person and can be a huge Head. Start for some and a hurdle that's too high to get over from any.  I believe that some people are innately good or bad at trading and it's fairly easy. Easy to see this early on, if you're a manager invest in the people that have the X Factor and help those that do not have it pivot as quickly as possible.  1 Trader that worked for me who did not have the X Factor told me 10 years after he pivoted to a job that fit in much better that he wished. Someone had told him earlier that he wasn't suited to be a Trader. He could have moved on to a new career that fit his personality and skills more quickly, set a wasting 5 years in a job that he and I probably both knew was not the best fit.  This is a useful Insight. Not everyone was born to be a Trader even if they successfully complete a sales and trading analyst program at a major Bank,  some of this X Factor is the difference between Street smarts and book smarts investment. Banks emphasize book smarts because they're easy to quantify and there's much less risk in someone with mega Quant skills from an Ivy League school.  pre 2005 or so many Traders emerged out of the back office or even the mail rooms of Wall Street firms because managers weighed X Factor and personality higher than they do now,  While those managers probably overweighted personality and fit the system. Now overweight academic credentials while failing to appreciate the street smarts needed to succeed in most trading roles.  You cannot hone X Factor, but it is important to be aware of it, were you born to be a Trader? Or did you just kind of fall into it by accident? Or because you saw how much money Traders make this matters?  Traders that feel they were born to trade have a better chance of surviving. Through the inevitable existential storms that blow into every Trader's mind from time to time.  If you believe you're doing what you're meant to do, you won't quit when it feels impossible.  This brings us to the next Category, 3 trait passion.  Passion for trading.  The number 1 thing I care about when hiring Traders is their passion for training.  This is usually easy to see. Because fake passion is easy to discern. I care that Traders are passionate because I believe, a, their chance of success is exponentially higher than that of a less passionate Trader. B, they're much more enjoyable to work with, because they're not complaining about how the market sucks, or the job sucks, or the world sucks. See, they're more likely to find personal happiness as a Trader.  People that enter trading by accident or because they're not sure what they want to do and just kind of land there after a training program, are less likely to succeed than the Myriad of kids who have had their eye on training since sophomore year of college trading is tiring frustrating, and often unrewarding you have to love it to stick with it.  When I worked as a day trader, there's a huge Banner on the trading floor that read. Thank God. It's Monday. That's exactly how I feel about trading even after 25 years when the FX Market opens on Sunday afternoon when s&p's open at 6 p.m. on Sunday night. I'm logged in and often trading right away, I'm excited. for the week to get started and to try to outright everyone else after analyzing all the weekend news,  This is borderline obsessive Behavior, but for me, it's a passion not an obsession.  I know that the line between passion and obsession is crazy thin. That's why I take specific steps to ensure. I do not lose perspective, I turn off my phone at night, I square up when I'm on holiday, I go for walks without my phone so that I'm not constantly checking the market Etc.  I'm a big believer in doing something you love. It's the biggest cliche in the world, but most cliches exist because they're true, something that is universally. True often becomes cliche, but that does not make it any less true.  My desire to always be in a growth environment where I can come in every day, do my best while feeling passionate about. What I do is part of the reason I've changed jobs so many times over the course of my lifetime. Why settle for a decent job? Why work for someone you don't get along with or in a job? That doesn't really fit do something. You're passionate If you lose the passion or find the role or environment doesn't fit, make a change. If you can.  And if you don't love trading find another job.  Since not everyone's cut out for trading part of the decision-making process for many Traders is figuring out when to quit when you've invested significant time and money into your trading career. How do you know when enough is enough? This is a hard question to answer because success in trading. Only comes with extreme perseverance and experience.  Therefore by its very nature, trading rewards those who refuse to quit.  You have to recognize that for most people, there will never be a clear sign from above that tells you exactly when enough is enough.  If you've been trading for more than 2 years and you're not making significant progress, that's a bad sign. I would say that anyone who's been trading for more than 3 years. Does not feel confident that they're on the right path is probably on the wrong path.  Not everyone can succeed at trading things are not working out. After 2 or 3 years of effort. Think about what comes next can you parlay your trading experience into another job or pursue investing financial planning research Etc.  The next trait is experience.  1 Catch 22 of trading. Is that experience, is 1 of the most important drivers of trading success, but if you don't succeed fairly early on, you never have the chance to get the experience.  Young Traders should put themselves in a position to gain experience at as low a cost as possible.  If you want to learn to train, you have 25,000 dollars to your name. Don't open a trading account with 25,000 in it. Most Traders lose money when they start out.  A good substitute for experience is a strong Mentor traders that go from college into junior trading roles at Banks or hedge funds. Have an enormous advantage over those who do not. They get experienced mentors solid training and the ability to learn using someone else's Money traders of any age, trying to learn to trade from home. Need to be aware of the huge disadvantage that they're saddled with and find a way to develop a network appears and some sort of mentorship.  Next, let's talk about luck. There's an ironic fact about most good Traders. They simultaneously understand the difference between variance and luck. Know that luck is not a long run factor in successful trading. Don't really believe in luck. And yet, consider themselves lucky  We'll get into the topic of luck, much more at chapter 11, but for now, let me just tell you that most good Traders. I know think of themselves as lucky  I think deep down most of them believe in the saying luck is when preparation meets opportunity, but at the same time, they also believe themselves to be abnormally. Lucky, you don't hear successful Traders saying, stuff. Like the markets have to get me here. I'm cursed. Or I'm the unluckiest person in the world if you say stuff like that. Stop  Those are things. You hear, Bad Traders, blurred out on a trading floor, is the world yet to get you or are you Going to take over the world, good Traders, understand that luck is purely a short-term phenomenon and it is evenly distributed over longer time frames.  Luck. Should have no impact whatsoever on a Trader's emotions. Good Traders. Say things like,  Wow, another disappointing day. Today, I'm now lost money. 5 days in a row. I need to stick to my process more than ever. I'll stay unemotional and work as hard as possible, tomorrow, or my methodology is not working. In this regime. I'll cut my risk in half and think about why there's seems to be a mismatch between my style and the market.  There are only 3 reasons you're losing money 1, your methodology is not producing Edge 2, mental or behavioral issues are causing you to deviate from your methodology. That is you're not sticking to your plan and 3 variants.  That's it again. We'll talk about this later, but variance is part of trading, there's no good and bad luck, just variance, which can be explained with Statistics and probability That's why there's no reason to pray for a market outcome or beg, the trading gods for a rally. Please just this 1 time. The only god of trading is probably even a forecaster who can predict the market accurately 90% of the time. Still be wrong 5 times in a row every now and then.  Locus of control, grit growth mindset and an individual's perception of her own luckiness all. Come down to the same core belief, I control my own fate, the harder I work, the better things will get for me in the long run. Even if bad stuff will inevitably happen in the short term, all that matters is the long game daily returns mean, nothing. Monthly and yearly returns are what matter.  You control your own fate. Never blame, external factors. When you lose money.  And now let's talk about healthy trading environment.  While I just spent several paragraphs, talk about the importance of internal, locus of control, and embracing the belief, you determine your trading outcomes. There's 1 extremely important, external factor to consider, you cannot succeed in an unhealthy trading environment. You must have a risk-taking environment that's not hostile to risk or thinly capitalized.  This point could have been at the top of this chapter, because in the wrong environment, even the most rational disciplined skilled. And self-aware Trader will fail. There are many features of a trading environment that can be desirable, but there are 2 that are absolutely necessary for survival and success 1, appropriate Capital 2 healthy and supportive risk taking environment.  Let's look at each feature separately.  Appropriate capital.  In terms of external factors sufficient capital is an absolute prerequisite for successful trading. Let's look at what this means for the 3 main types of Trader.  Retail Traders.  no retail Trader can succeed with the $1,000 trading account because the income generated from the most successful, Strategy will be too small to move the needle.  Even a 300% return will not be enough to make a difference. And so the trader is very likely to employ too much leverage and blow up the account by a gambling.  A tiny trading account is okay, for learning the markets and much better than paper trading. It might give you a sense of the emotional and psychological hurdles that come with live trading, but it will never give you a chance to really know what kind of Trader you are.  In general position, sizing can account for most issues, around insufficient Capital. If your capital is small, you need to take smaller positions and we'll discuss position sizing in Chapter 11.  But there are thresholds below, which you cannot hope to succeed. For young retail Trader, with no family to support and low expenses. This amount could be as low as 25,000.  For a dentist with 3 kids in private school, looking to quit his job and trade full-time. This number would be significantly higher.  Bank Traders.  If you work in a bank, you don't have a fixed amount. Set of capital. Instead you have risk limits as such your risk limits. Need to be properly aligned with your performance expectations or budget.  If you have a $30,000 daily stop-loss and a budget of dollars you'll fail. It's impossible to make $10 million in a year with such a tight daily stop.  The easiest way to determine whether your risk limits are appropriate, in a bank is to run simulations, you can set up simple simulations in a spreadsheet to look at a 252 day, period and spin at ranges of outcomes, based on various inputs, retail Traders can do this as well, to determine risk of ruin.  The greater idea you have of your prior performance statistics, the more accurate, the simulation will be, I'll go into a deeper discussion of how do you simulations to understand performance and risk of Ruin in Chapter 11?  Portfolio managers.  Capital or assets under management is a critical variable for every hedge fund and real money portfolio, manager or PM.  Good. PMs can scale their strategy substantially and tend to think of performance in terms of basis points, not dollars.  Good PMS, comfortably scale their risk up or down as necessary based on the capital they are managing on the other hand PMS that think about p&l in terms of dollars tend to have trouble sizing up or sizing down because they're anchored on various p&l thresholds.  If you think of a good day, as 1 million of p&l, you won't adjust very smoothly as your Capital increases from 100 million to 1 billion.  On the other hand, if you think of a good day as 100 basis points, you'll be fine.  Note that it is possible to have too much capital. In fact, a common issue with hedge fund portfolio. Managers is that they have too much Capital, not too. Little many Traders at hedge funds are pressured to take on more and more Capital, regardless of the capacity of their trading strategy. And it takes a Trader with courageous Integrity to say no to more capital.  It's a bit like, refusing, a promotion. Quite often, it could be the right decision, but it can feel strange and potentially risky to do so.  Every Trader and every trading strategy has an optimal level of capital, the more Capital you take on the worse, your returns will be after a certain point because your best strategies will reach capacity and additional Capital will need to be allocated to inferior strategies. If you're a PM and a hedge fund, you should Target your optimal level of capital. Not just look to increase your Capital year after year.  Capacity depends to a great extent on the products. You trade a boutique institutional Trader specializing in micro cab stocks will have much lower capacity than a hedge fund PM trading. G10 currencies capacity is mostly determined by the liquidity.  Research shows that there's a sweet spot for hedge. Fund size in the 250 million to 1 billion assets under management range.  Below. 250 million costs are hard to cover and about 1 billion returns in Sharpe, ratios fall. This is logically true for individual man. Managers as well.  This does not mean all increases in capital are bad, you need to think about what your optimal capitalization level looks like and a for that but not higher.  As your Capital Rises to higher than optimal levels, the opportunity set is diluted and transaction. Costs. Increased disproportionately the high alpha opportunities are slowly, drowned out by inferior trades.  And next I want to talk about a healthy risk-taking environment.  A healthy environment breeds successful Risk Takers, even the best Trader is unlikely to succeed in a toxic environment, a healthy risk. Taking environment means different things for different types of Trader.  For people trading their own money. That is retail Traders, a healthy environment means enough, Runway to learn make mistakes, bounce back and eventually prosper.  Capital is crucial as mentioned in the last section. But so is support from family, financial flexibility, and the ability to focus and get in the zone all day. If you want to be a Trader but your wife wants you to get a real job and you have twins screaming from the other room and no money to pay rent. Next month, turn off the audiobook and come back. When you have a more conducive environment trading is hard enough, anything that makes it harder, usually makes it impossible.  You own your life. So if you want to be a Trader, do it, but pick the right time and circumstances to do it. So that you give yourself a proper shot at success. There's nothing worse than wondering. What might have been.  Quite often, you can work full-time. Find ways to trade on the side, and more importantly, study trading. So that as you gain experience, and confidence in trading, you're still earning a steady income. Then once you have a decent amount of money in the bank, you have a bit of Runway to trade full-time and see if you have what it takes.  For Bank Traders, it's a little different. You would think that most or all bag Traders would operate in a healthy risk taking environment, but this is absolutely not the case. Thanks have different levels of risk, appetite and managers within those Can have dramatically different incentives.  Let's say you trade 10 year? Bonds at a large Commercial Bank. Imagine 2 environment.  Scenario a, the manager that hired you and mentored, you got a job offer at an investment bank and just left under somewhat acrimonious circumstances. Instead of replacing the head of trading, the bank has given the current head of sales responsibility for your group. He never liked your old boss. He's never traded before any plans to retire in a few years. He just wants to survive the last few years of his career and pay for his kids. Last few years of college he's extremely risk. Averse he views the business model as an agency, where clients do trades. The bank goes to Market and offloads the risk and the bank earns a small nearly risk-free commission or imagine scenario. B your manager's fired up at entrepreneurial and previously rang Global macro at a big hedge fund. He wants that kind of ambitious. Risk culture at your bank because he believes a strong healthy risk culture. Best serves the clients of the bank.  By employing meaningful risk, appetite the bank can provide best-in-class pricing to clients world-class trade ideas and expert Market intelligence customers, get Superior Service from the bank and the bank makes more money than the competition in the process. When when  It's pretty obvious, which Trader is going to have a greater chance of success and most enjoy coming to work each day. If you work at a bank you should regularly evaluate your environment and study where your incentives are aligned with the banks and where they are not to succeed, you need clear risk limits and Rules of Engagement. So that no 1's ever second-guessing your actions and you don't have to second guess them yourself.  And finally portfolio managers.  PMS are most likely to work in a healthy risk-taking environment. Since hedge funds and asset managers are often exclusively in the business of taking risk, they best understand the nature of risk and they are usually good at Creating a clear set of rules and then letting Traders trade.  Still, it's important to understand where your incentives aligned with those of the firm and where they do not so you don't miss fire.  The most important example of this is that many hedge fund Risk Managers Focus as much or more on volatility of Returns versus absolute returns. This is because the risk manager at a pod-based hedge fund sees each Trader as part of a portfolio.  If the returns of each pm, look, approximately, like those of a call option, small downside with unlimited upside, then the aggregate performance of all those Traders. At the end of the year, is likely to look pretty good.  If on the other hand, most Traders are targeting 6% volatility while 2 or 3 are realizing 25%. Volatility the business model does not work as well.  While you're paid a percentage of your absolute returns quite often. Your manager is almost as concerned about your volatility as she is about the headline returns number, this makes perfect sense. Especially because Risk Managers are constantly trying to separate luck from skill.  A Trader that makes money consistently with low volatility is much more likely to be displaying skill versus a PM that puts up 3 years, like plus 70% minus 24% plus 35%.  Furthermore, the risk of Ruin of a steady Eddie is significantly lower than the PM. I just mentioned. And no 1 want to be the 1 managing a Trader when he blows up.  This is non-argument for you to Target a specific level of volatility and forget about returns. All I'm saying is, you should be acutely aware of your managers and your investors incentives. Not just your own.  A related phenomenon, you'll see at many hedge funds is that, while your contract may have a stop loss, your real stop loss might be much tighter contractual risk. Limits are often wider than reality depending on the personality of the business and the Risk Managers involved. If you're new in a hedge fund, make sure you fully understand all the written and Unwritten rules, the fund follows, your official stop-loss might be minus 15%. But if every other Trader that everyone down, 9% at the fund, got a shoulder tap. You should probably calibrate to a 9% stop-loss or tighter.  Think about your managers and your investors incentives, does your strategy and behavior. Align  This advice applies to Traders at every type of institution, when you understand the incentives of management, you can make sure you're playing by the correct rules. And you will not put yourself or your manager in an unwanted or awkward position.  And here are a few more features of a healthy risk-taking environment.  1 peers. There are other good Risk Takers to talk with and bounce ideas off. Hopefully there's at least 1 Trader that is more experienced and more skilled than you. Otherwise you're always the mentor and never the mentee  for retail Traders. I believe there's a huge benefit to working in a trading office, not at home, you learn from others, have people to share ideas with and share the p. With when things go wrong.  A robust Network appears, gives you a chance to talk about specific trades, General, risk, management and other trading related topics, make a concerted effort to build a strong network of trading peers. This can be online or in real life. Learning takes longer if you have to figure out everything by yourself.  The next feature of a healthy risk-taking environment is rule-based limits and risk-taking framework.  The clearer, The Rules of Engagement the easier, it is to develop the clear process and proper risk management. You don't want an environment where a loss is find 1 Day but the same loss 2 weeks. Later results in a bunch of emails. Flying around asking what happened as for Clear numerical limits and goals.  Next is management risk, appetite management. Understands that if you take real risk, you will lose money. Sometimes it's common to hear Bank Traders joke about the take risk, but don't lose money. Business model. This is a model that works well for management. As it essentially means, they can Sleep well at night, knowing that Traders are monetizing client flow, but not taking any meaningful risk. It's less attractive for individual Traders because their leeway to express views is severely limited.  The only time Traders can take risk in this model is when they're already profitable usually, from a client trade, this model allows traders to risk money earned, but not take real Financial Risk that may result in losses.  Next a mentor to teach you support your risk-taking and help you maintain confidence during the inevitable downtime. And finally, a clear connection between performance and pay risk. Appetite Fizzles when Traders, don't expect to get paid for Alpha. They generate taking real risk requires significant. Mental energy and endurance and Traders will not give their all to a business. They do not believe will compensate them for doing so.  And that just about concludes this chapter on winning traits. When you finish this chapter turn, the audio book off for a bit and take Take a moment to think about 1 or 2 characteristics. You want to work on go through my tips and write down a couple of specific actions. You'll take to improve in particular areas then come back to chapter 6.  I strongly believe that Improvement comes in small increments and by focusing on 1 or 2 specific goals, achieve those goals, then, set new goals. Don't try to do everything at once or monitor 17 areas where you hope to improve drill down and pick 1 or 2, then do the work.  All right. That is the end of chapter 5. Those are the positive traits that will bring you success in trading.  Now, let's look at all the faulty thinking and ugly habits that lead you astray.  Chapter 6, Kryptonite.  Bad habits, mistakes sloppy thinking, and leaks.  There are specific. Big bad habits, mistakes unhealthy, mindsets and persistent errors. That lead traders to fail.  Most bad trading follows a few specific patterns. In this chapter. I'll go into some of the most common sources of Trader Kryptonite and outline strategies to reduce the impact of negative traits.  Building strength is important but you must also minimize destructive and unprofitable behaviors  The most damaging of all forms of Trader Kryptonite is biased or bad thinking and will discuss bias in depth. In chapter 7, this chapter will focus on everything else that holds Traders back other than irrational and biased thinking  when thinking about why Traders lose money, the starting point is simple trading is not a zero-sum game, it is a negative sum game.  Their external costs like technology, Hardware research, data Personnel, Etc and transaction cost. Plus commissions, bid offer slippage. They eat away at your performance day after day, if you generate small gains, your Alpha will leak away in a steady stream of payments to vendors and market makers.  When I traded the NASDAQ bubble from 1999 to 2002, my gross daily p&l was rarely negative and I was gross positive every single month. But I went from wildly profitable in 1999 and 2000 to Flat in 2001 and net negative in 2002. As I had to trade more and more shares to generate the same pnl. After the absolute value of NASDAQ stocks collapsed following the bubble burst.  instead of trying to make 3 dollars on a thousand shares as Qualcomm jumped from 600 to 603,  I had to make 30 cents on 10,000 shares as Qualcomm moved from $60 to $60.30.  the simultaneous collapse of stock prices, and the decimal Ization of equity trading at the highly profitable strategies. I employed in 1999 and 2000 were no longer profitable by 2002 transaction costs are a constant drag on performance. So you need a big Edge to succeed in trading.  Today Stock Market trading is free in theory for many individuals. But you know, the saying, if the product is free, then you are the product in the past, you've paid a transparent commission and the bid offer spread  Now you still pay the bid off for spread and you pay a hidden transaction fee which is the profit earned by a high-frequency market maker which receives an ultra short-term free option as it chooses, how to execute your trade.  Trading costs continue to Trend lower, but are more and more difficult to observe or measure and they matter.  Another reason that trading is negative sub for individuals is information and Technology asymmetry.  Large institutions, like Bank. Asset managers and central banks have better access to information and Superior faster. Technology, a Trader at home. Watching news, headlines cannot compete with algorithmic headline reading software. When Market moving news comes out individual human Traders, are at a meaningful speed disadvantage.  A portfolio manager at a hedge fund or a Trader at a bank as a team of analysts and quads working with them to extract signals from the noise, they have in-depth analysis of coming events and instant breakdowns of important news. The Twitter era has democratized this a fair bit and substantially decreased. The advantage of the institution's over the individuals. There's a ton of high-quality information and Analysis on Twitter. If you know where to look,  Still institutional information is generally higher quality and easier to access than the information available to those outside the industry.  Let's look at some of the most common reasons, Traders, lose money. What? That discipline 2, not enough Edge 3 over, Reliance on simple, indicators 4, too much. Focus on trade ideas and not enough. Focus on risk management and 5 emotion  Let's start with bad discipline.  The number 1 reason that Traders lose money is bad discipline no amount of edge or skill matters. If you cannot stick to the plan,  The most amazing Alpha generating strategy is useless if you deviate from it.  The most sophisticated optimized and adaptive risk management system will fail. If you selectively ignore, some of its rules and procedures depending on your mood or emotional state.  every time you deviate from your process or your plan, because of bad discipline or emotion, you leak money,  Learning the rules is easy. Following them is hard.  I am highly qualified to talk about the importance of discipline and training because my best and worst Trading. Always depends on my level of discipline. The market is like a siren from Homer's Odyssey. Always trying to get you to crash your boat into the Rocks constantly. Trying to make you break your own rules.  Overtrading Is My Kryptonite and I could write an entire book about my own battles with bad discipline. 1 of the great contradictions of trading is a conservative disciplined. People tend to be risk averse while risk-loving, people tend to be compulsive and undisciplined, this is not a truism, just a general relationship between overlapping and character traits. The great Paradox of trading is that it demands? You be both risk-loving and highly disciplined. Most people are 1 or the other, you need to be both.  This is the essence of the tight Progressive philosophy. Described earlier, you follow the rules, you wait, you analyze, you stay patient. You ignore low quality ideas and then finally, a juicy trade presents itself and you attack aggressively. That discipline often reveals itself as overtrading gambling or trading for fun and stimulation.  Another symptom of bad discipline is the inability to stick to the plan, moving your stop-loss and take profit when they get close for example.  Often, this is a simple emotional reaction to movements in price.  When people own an asset that is going up, they have trouble selling it. Even if their initial plan was to take profit at a particular level that has just been reached. If discipline is an issue for you spend, most of your time trying to level up this characteristic automate your process as much as possible.  bad discipline is the number 1 source of Trader, Kryptonite  there is a demon voice, in many people's heads, the voice that tells skinny women, they are fat or convinces alcoholics to have just 1 drink  that voice is there to sabotage you and your trading, it can make you do things that make no sense and often you will barely understand your own actions, when you follow, Have you ever heard a voice in your head saying? Just hold on a bit longer, it'll bounce back, get back to Flat. Then square up. No point taking the loss here. It'll definitely bounce.  Or the stocks rallying. You can't miss this move. I know you stopped out at the low already but you have to buy the high. Now you're going to miss a huge rally. The guy next to you is long at good levels, he's making so much more money than you.  Do you control that voice or does it control you?  This sort of stuff gets existential, pretty fast, and the voice in your head is a subject of many books and articles on psychology, mental health self-help and philosophy, The Duality or multiplicity of the human mind is an incredible and fascinating topic. And you should be aware of how. And when these voices in your head sabotage, you  understanding how your ego and non-productive voices in your head, manipulate your behavior. And self-worth is a critical step towards self-awareness. You must recognize when the wrong voice. Tell you to press the buy and sell buttons meditation and mindfulness training along with books, like The Power of Now, by eared, to can help you quiet and control the non-productive negative or disruptive voices in your head, a well-designed process and an automated risk management system. Also help as they create fewer decision points where you have to intervene or actively make decisions under stress.  The less you have to decide on the Fly while in a position and the more your parameters are laid out beforehand and not subject to revision, the better.  We'll get more into risk management in Chapter 11.  While bad discipline often, kills off otherwise, good Traders. Bad Traders usually lose money because they suffer from 1 or more of the following problems.  Not enough Edge.  Whether you trade at the biggest asset management, firm in Midtown, Manhattan or out of a spare room in your parents house in which to talk Kansas. Trading is an impossibly complex game of imperfect information. Played by many thousands of technologically sophisticated and highly motivated opponents. What is your Edge?  Successful Traders can clearly and confidently explain their Edge.  Do you have enough Edge to outperform the market and exceed transaction costs? This is the most important question in trading, especially if you do not work at a bank banks, have some built-in Edge, like better information Market, making revenue and the best access to liquidity. But if you work at home or at a hedge fund or at an asset management firm, what is your Edge? Don't lie to yourself? Think about it and be honest,  Sources of edge.  Let's take a detour for a minute. And look at some sources of edge over the years. There are many other sources of edge, especially at the micro level this list is meant to get you thinking about your own Edge. The point is not to go through the list and pick 1. It's a starting point for thinking about and understanding your personal trading Edge.  There's a cliche that if you're out of poker table and you don't know who the sucker is, you are the sucker. Similarly, if you are a Trader and you do not know what your Edge is, you probably don't have an edge.  I will focus on sources of edge, for human Traders and the date ranges that provide are my best estimate of when that source of edge was most prevalent.  Most of these sources of edge still exist, but are greatly diminished from Peak.  Trend following 1984 to 2003.  Trend following systems were the go-to source for human and computer Alpha in the 1980s and 1990s.  Many large Trend following commodity trading, advisors, or ctas, extracted, meaningful abnormal returns for more than 2 decades.  Returns from Trend following systems, have steadily declined over the past. 40 years, many studies covered the slow decline of trend following performance a Ready by Wynton showed the steady decline in Trend following Sharpe ratios over time.  From 1984 to 1993. The sharp of trend following strategies across 20 asset classes was 1.85.  From 1994 to 2003 it was 0.85 and 2004 to 2013. It was straight up zero.  now this does not show there are zero profitable Trend following strategies, but clearly The Edge has dropped over time  This is not a surprise given the proliferation of academic literature on the topic in the 1990s and 2000s.  As a strategy becomes well known. Its sharp ratio grinds towards zero.  Asymmetrical information and lack of transparency 1980 to 1996.  Before the internet markets, were opaque and it was hard for those outside financial institutions to get an accurate view of prices.  Traders at Banks and large investment. Firms had a meaningful Advantage given their knowledge of accurate price levels and because of wide bid offer spreads.  Meanwhile relatively few macro Traders, had big research budgets or access to policy makers. Those who did had a massive Edge over less informed and less, sophisticated, corporations, and speculators.  Instantaneous communication speeds near unlimited, availability of information and rigorous compliance and monitoring of non-public information, have dramatically flattened the landscape for both macro and Bank Traders at this point.  Technical analysis. 1980 to 2006.  The most common trading strategy on most trading desks I worked on before. 2006 was technical analysis.  Most techniques were fairly basic while some of the smarter sounding people might throw in some Elliot wave or more esoteric systems built in Lotus 123  most of these strategies produced what amounted to Trend following Or breakout signals.  Continuation, patterns breakouts, Head and Shoulders Etc. Were the favored setups. And these piggybacked on the underlying High sharp of trend following strategies in that era as algorithmic. Strategies became more common in the mid-2000s and Trend following Sharp's, fizzled Traders using simple technical analysis, lost their Edge. Because technical strategies are easy to replicate with a computer and computers are better than humans. When it comes to risk management and unbiased trade selection,  Now, I believe technical analysis has been reduced to a risk management tool and does not work effectively for trade selection or forecasting.  Analyzing price action 19770 to 2015 or so.  If it feels to me that price action in recent years has become increasingly meaningless. The idea that something trades, well, or looks bid, pretty much just means it's at the highs these days, not that it's going higher.  Price action. Has lost most of its forecasting value. I think very short term. There is still meaning in good news, bad price, setups. That is when something can't rally on good news. That's temporarily bearish. But this effect has a short half-life  Here's Stan. Drucken Miller commenting on the decline of price action as a signal in 2018, quote.  These alos have taken all the Rhythm out of the market and have become extremely confusing to me. And when you take away price action versus news from someone who's used price action at, their major disciplinary tool for 35 years it's tough and it's become very tough. I don't know where this is all going, if it continues. I'm not going to return to 30% a year. Anytime soon, not that I think I might anyway, but 1 can always dream, when the free money ends will go back to a normal macro trading, environment end quote,  I think perhaps algorithms, which are less emotional and react, less predictably to news are partly to blame for the decline in the important. Importance of price action, but there could also be the simple fact that everyone knows about this style of analysis. So it is lost its Edge.  The current generation of 30 to 45 year, old Traders were all brought up on reminiscences of a stock operator and Market Wizards, and thus, we are always scouring the price action for a signal.  Throw in the massive price distortions from non-price sensitive Central Bank buying of various assets and it's not hard to see how whatever signal price action might have carried in the past has been destroyed by central banks and Arbitrage Away by speculators who all learn from the same books and interviews.  Global macro 19770 to now.  Global macro is very crowded as the proliferation of pod-based hedge funds and internet macro strategists, push Global macro into the mainstream around 2005 and left too much Capital, chasing too little Alpha  if you assume that any Market strategy or inefficiency has x amount of alpha of Ailable.  And the more actors trying to gobble up that Alpha the lower average returns and average Sharps must fall over time.  too much competition and low interest rates are the top 2 challenges to Global macro hedge fund returns since 2008,  Massive moves in asset. Prices driven by fed QE avonix and ECB QE delivered. Monster Alpha to hedge funds at various points in the 2010s. But these epic events have been rare in recent years.  Macro had a big comeback from 2020 to 202022 because of coid and the related Market disruptions.  Correlation and intermarket Analysis. 2004 to 2014.  This was my bread and butter back in the Lehman Brothers days. But after the 2008, Global financial crisis, everyone became acutely aware of the importance of correlation and intermarket Analysis for short-term Trading.  Just about every Global macro Trader and blogger in the world. Is highly proficient in this style of analysis. Now, and there are many, many computerized systems using Dynamic correlation to trade every asset class again, too much money, chasing too little Alpha.  I still use correlation as an important input for my trade ideas, but I think its usefulness has declined significantly over the past 20 years.  Trading the data 1990 to 2005.  It's 1997. I expect a strong non-farm payrolls number and Diane is 1. 18885  As 8:30 a.m. approaches Ikea, a bid for 100 million dollar Yen at 1:19 01. I stare intensely at the US. Economic release page on bloomer.  5 4, 3, 2, 1.  If the numbers significantly better than expectations. I hit send. If not, I do not nothing.  Often before 2005 or so you could scoop up. up all the lazy offers left by risk, averse Traders, and make an instant 100,000 or 200,000 profit in the seconds after any major economic release,  Now there are hundreds of algo set up with a series of commands. Like if non-farm payrolls Beats by what standard deviation and unemployment rate drops by 100. Yen limit X  All available liquidity is sucked up in micros seconds. As an army of algo wipes. The battlefield clean.  There's some second derivative ways to make money trading the economic data now, but 95% of the alpha is owned by the algorithms. This creates a form of Singularity, where price Finds Its new equilibrium point, almost instantly, after economic data hits the market.  Instead of flailing all over the place as it tries to find the right price delaying and just ratchets to the new correct price in a few minutes. As similarly tuned programs react at faster than human speed.  Pattern recognition 1982 now.  There's a famous story of Paul Tudor Jones and Peter borscht using price, and volume patterns to uncover an analogy between the price and volume pattern in the stock market in, 1987 and price, and volume in the stock market in 1929.  Using this analogy macro analysis and his concerns about derivatives, portfolio insurance and Equity features without price limits tutor predicted, the crash of 87 and returned. 62% in October 1987  In the present day, this type of analogy would be tweeted 22 times by day, Traders, and online, bloggers and would be revealed in the output of every machine learning Ai and pattern recognition machine at every hedge fund and Bank in the world computers are significantly better than humans, when it comes to unbiased pattern recognition.  I do believe, though, there's still an edge in pattern recognition. Experienced human Traders can still combine complex pieces of information to form conclusions. That would elude the best computers.  Leverage carry and selling risk premium forever.  4082 and buy an asset that yields 7% Carrie and roll down. Sell insurance to hedgers sell. SPX puts  These are the tried tested and true ways to generate consistent returns. These strategies produce non-normal returns and lead to occasional blow-ups and meltdowns and are often more beta than Alpha.  Tactics like timing on entries and exits, and Superior risk management. Though can make simple levered carry and option selling strategies more like Alpha and beta.  Quant. Discretionary combo. 2012 to now  While quantitative analysis was once mostly the domain of systematic and algorithmic trading programs human Traders. Now use more sophisticated quantitative methods.  Combining the best. Quantitative analysts the best data sets and the best discretionary Traders into 1 business pod looks to me like the ideal model for discretionary Alpha capture in the current ERA.  Quantitative analysis is greatly enhanced by experienced humans who can ask the right questions. Models are great for many types of training but are not as good at other tasks such as predicting or reacting to regime change or handling 1-off events.  All these styles of Trading still work off and on the challenge, is to find a trading style, that gives you an edge in the current market and then stay clear-eyed open-minded and adaptable. So you can transition or pivot as the market changes. Your Edge this month, might not be your Edge next month or next year,  Detour complete. I hope this brief Round-Up of historical sources of edge helps. You think about and identify your current Edge?  This brings us to the next reason that Traders lose money. Over Reliance on simple indicators.  Many Traders, put way too much faith in simple indicators. While there's something to be said for Simplicity, you also need to be realistic enough to grasp that drawing a trend line on a daily chart and buying the break of that line is probably not a strategy that will offer much Edge in the long run. Anything a computer can easily do is unlikely to be a huge winner.  Many retail Traders get sucked into seminars and trading courses, that advertise simple breakout or similar technical strategies often the sellers of these strategies offer up impressive data showing that a particular strategy has generated outside returns. Remember that, this is all backward-looking. Using any simple trading software. I can back test a few thousand strategies and then cherry-pick the ones that were incredibly profitable in hindsight. Then advertise, those the problem with this sort of analysis is that it does not work out of sample. In Sample is data, you analyze to come up with a strategy. Out of sample. Data is a separate set of data. You use to test the strategy. This helps avoid Data Mining and snooping problems because almost any set of data will eventually yield, what looks like a decent strategy if you torture it long enough.  Do not believe the hype of online training seminars that claim. Consistent profits from simple technical indicators. There is an entire industry built around the idea of easy profits and simple strategies. And the sad fact, is that these programs do not work instead of dumping 15,000 into a bogus training program, put $10,000 into a trading account by a huge pile, of trading books, at a bunch of meditation, classes. Think of that, in a trading account, as tuition and start trading very cautiously  Reliance on simple. Indicators is not just a problem. In retail. Trading very often, a bank Trader will send out a trade wreck featuring something like a trend line. going back 5 years that just broke, they'll Advocate a trade based on the Breakout  Personally, My Philosophy is that simple is good in general, but there's a point where analysis is too simple. Buy an asset, because a line on a chart broke belongs in the 2. Simple category for me,  does it really pass the sniff test that you can draw a line on a chart? Then wait for it to break and that will be a sustainable source of alpha or Edge in a complex game played by the most expensive computers and some of the smartest human beings in the world.  I doubt it these sorts of basic trying to following strategies were money in the 1980s and into the 1990s but not now,  The computer has better to discipline than you and can execute a simple technical breakout strategy with less slippage and zero emotion. Simple technical strategies, especially breakout, strategies are like dashboard indicators in your car. Yes, they are helpful almost indispensable, really. But you would never drive a car. Just By staring at the speedometer tachometer and GPS, if you want to succeed in trading, you'll need to find a more sophisticated source of edge than technical analysis. It's part of the toolkit, but it doesn't work by itself.  We'll talk more about the behavioral pitfalls of technical analysis. When we discuss epifania in chapter 10 and I touch on The Good, the Bad and the Ugly of technical analysis throughout this book. Now, let's move on to the next reason, Traders lose money.  Too much, focus on, trade ideas, and not enough. Focus on risk management.  For every hundred trading books available on Amazon, I would estimate that 1 is about risk management. 29 are about trading psychology and the remaining 70 are mostly focused on trading systems or how to come up with trade ideas.  And half of those how to come up with trade ideas, books, describe, simple, strategies, that have no Edge.  finding good trade ideas is the start of the trading process, but Risk management is the ultimate determinant of success or failure in trading. Even if you can properly forecast, the direction of the market 65% of the time, a very high success rate. If you don't manage your risk properly, you'll either slowly bleed out or quickly blow up.  Risk management is so important that I've devoted all of chapter 11 to the topic for. Now, just know that bad risk management leads to failure. Mainly by a 3 channels, 1 risk of ruin. This is the big 1. It doesn't matter how smart you are, or how much Edge you have, if you look into the abyss enough times, eventually, you'll fall in some trading Styles and strategies are more prone to ruin than others.  2, slow bleed. If you cut your winners too fast or regularly ignore or move your stop losses trades where you are. Risking 1 to make 2, turn into trades where you're risking say 1.3 to make 0.8 your Capital slowly leaks out. Like are from a tire.  3 static position sizing.  Failure to understand how position sizing relates to volatility Capital levels and profit objectives can lead you to trade the wrong position size, especially when macro or volatility regimes change this will lead to both sub-optimal performance and increased risk of ruin.  I'll save the rest of the risk management discussion for chapter 11. Let's look at another reason, Traders lose money.  Emotion.  Emotions are not necessarily bad but they are detrimental. We need to not recognize them and when you allow them to influence your thinking, emotions can make you less rational  When an attractive trade idea comes along, and you have a solid process. It doesn't matter whether you've lost money, 5 days in a row, or just finished a record 6 week run, it does not matter if you woke up in a great mood or can barely get out of bed, you'll process will determine when to take risk. What position size to set and what reassessment triggers make sense. But emotions can trigger bad thinking and bad trading, if you let them  Several studies confirm this including 1 by low repping and steenbarger which says quote specifically the survey data indicate that subjects whose emotional reactions to monetary gains and losses were more intense on both the positive and negative side. Exhibited significantly worse. Trading performance, implying a negative correlation between successful, trading behavior and emotional, reactivity and quote.  Here are some emotions that cause trouble for Traders.  Frustration.  We need smash your fist repeatedly on a pinball machine, it eventually tilts and stops working. The human mind can be similar when faced with a series of stressful losses. Especially, particularly hard to believe or unlucky losses. Many Traders will tilt when until they will. Shut down or take extra risk in order to get revenge on the market. Traders who attempt to get revenge on the market are more likely to face ruin, not find Redemption.  The point is not to turn yourself into a robot and operate in an emotionless void, but to recognize your emotions via self-awareness and develop strategies to deal with strong and harmful emotions before they jeopardize performance.  Often all it takes is a quick walk outside or across the trading floor, to clear your flooded mind and return to emotional equilibrium for more severe or prolonged negative, emotional states. A few days off might be required.  Since I work at a bank and have client facing responsibilities, it's not practical for me to take a day off. When my frustration levels High, instead, I'll come in to work, but I don't trade, I write and research or work on quantitative projects. The benefit of this approach is that I still stay in touch with the market, but the Drawback is that if you're in front of the screens, there's always going to be the temptation to trade.  If you're worried that, you're not disciplined enough to keep your hands off the keys, find something else to do.  Take a day with the kids, go watch a movie or spend a day reading at the library. Some Traders prefer the mental Clarity and cleansing that comes with getting away from the computer and truly disconnecting from the market. I can see that logic.  Whatever you do, do not sit there with an angry lump in your throat, pounding the buy and sell buttons out of frustration. This is like the poker player who loses 8 hands in a row turns red-faced and shoves all his chips into the pot without even looking at his cards, this is not good.  Euphoria.  on trading's, emotional Spectrum, the opposite of frustration is euphoria  In my trading, I tend to have more of a performance issue around Euphoria than frustration.  When I'm frustrated, I tighten up and wait for ED. Opportunities. And that makes me better not worse. On the other hand, when I'm doing very well, I sometimes increase my risk more than is justified by the set of Market opportunities.  This is called the house money effect, which I mentioned earlier.  Rarely, will I see my p&l crash after a moderate or bad trading period? My biggest drawdowns, almost always come after a sustained period of over earning I get overconfident cartoon dollar signs flash of my eyes. I double a position that is deep in the money when I should be taking profit. There's a particular level of p&l where I know I tend to get sloppy so I use conditional. Formatting in my p&l spreadsheet to create an alert,  the month to date cell turns orange as they, I'm doing too well, level gets close and then the cell turns red once the over earning threshold is crossed  for me trading. Well, seems to lead to more good trading up until a point. And then eventually I hit a point of overconfidence sloppy trading which sometimes leads to a big draw down.  This phenomenon is also called winners tilt tilt is usually a condition associated with Traders or poker players that are losing or on a run of bad luck. They go on tilt which means they start chasing with bad cards in bad situations because their minds are flooded or they are seeing red.  In contrast, winners tilt is another way of describing the house money effect, temporary Madness brought on by a series of winning trades or winning days. I can feel this coming on now as usually, I feel a big giddy when it's happening and I might even find myself singing or joking around. More than usual on the desk.  Taylor and Johnson finds strong evidence of the house money effect in their 1990 paper.  Gambling with the house money and trying to break even.  The effects of Prior outcomes on a risky choice. Choice.  The gist of the paper is that when wagering with uncertainty we should logically make decisions based on the probabilities associated with various outcomes and those decisions should be rational and independent of what happened before.  Instead we gamble more recklessly when our pockets are full of black chips. Meanwhile, when we are in a negative position sitting on a loss, we find bets that offer the chance of Break Even inordinately attractive.  Anyone who has ever traded recognizes these 2 related forms of bias.  Rational betters evaluate current odds and do not factor in Prior outcomes.  Be aware of your own emotions at all times and watch for the house. Money effect in your trading. Do you trade strong when you are up money or do you trade over aggressive and sloppy?  If you are singing on the desk or yelling with excitement or pumping your fists action, you're about to get punched in the mouth. Here's a short post, I wrote on this topic in 2020.  Joyful yelling signals imminent. Pnl crash.  1 of the underappreciated features of working on a trading floor, is that you're allowed to yell, pretty much whenever you want.  In contrast at other jobs, I've held in the past, pizza maker guy at Little Caesars data entry clerk at statistics, Canada, or gas pumper. At Texaco. It would be super weird to randomly yell out, for example, the number 32, at max volume.  It would generally be frowned upon if I suddenly screamed, you're done from a government office. Cubicle  But on a trading floor, random yelling is perfectly fine.  As much as it's fun to yell on a trading floor, though. It can sometimes be a sign of euphoria and overconfidence.  Overconfidence leads to overtrading, poor sizing confirmation bias and a failure to see alternative hypotheses.  Because you know you're right. Why bother? Thinking about how you could be wrong, right?  Overconfidence is also 1 of the main reasons, men underperform women in trading.  Anyway, I'm generally a fairly humble guy and I like to think about alternative hypotheses and all that, but 1 of my leeks is a particular type of monetary overconfidence when I'm doing abnormally. Well, I get excited. I want to add risk even though I should be reducing. I'm momentarily swept up by a wave of irrational, exuberance and should be thinking about reversion to the mean. Not further upside momentum, many Traders, commit, this error.  Example, last Thursday, I could sense the market putting on a bit of a deflation trade or more accurately taking off the popular reflation trade.  And so I bought a dollar, mechs call to hedge a predicted. Flurry of coming risk, aversion.  Almost instantly dollar backs ripped higher from 1876 to 1885 and our franchise lit up all at once. A flood of client. Trades came through from sales.  Excited about my good timing and all the flow coming in. I yelled facts is back across the training floor.  A hopeful nod to the idea that the recent long and painful months of low FX volatility might be over.  Then I looked over to my chat log and saw 1 of my Brokers had just typed. Hey Brett, nice call on Mexico.  Trader on the options desk. Congratulated me a few seconds later, I glanced at my p&l and saw 1 of my best days and the past 2 months, and then you can probably guess what happened next.  Sad trombone. It all went terribly wrong. That moment was the exact peak in dollar Max and it was right back where it started a couple of hours later.  This is a phenomenon I called the cheer hedge when you cheer for a position or yell or saying or fist bump on the trading floor, watch out your p&l is about to crash.  The reason I called the cheer hedge is that when I was a manager whenever when 1 of my Traders, started singing or cheering for a position, I always hedged the position in the management book right away and the Hedge always made money.  I wrote about this in the art of currency trading and I now make this mistake less than I used to.  But knowing the rules and following the rules is not always the same thing. That's 1 reason. Trading is so hard.  And that's the end of that. Anecdote, the takeaway here is that you need to be aware, not just of your own General level of risk appetite, but also of how your risk appetite changes under different conditions,  I described the house money or winners tilt effect in that story and you probably have similar personal experiences.  What makes your risk appetite? Go up and down.  Catalog, the factors and be aware when they kick in.  Note that I've just described how you Euphoria can lead to overconfidence. I'll dig much deeper into the topic of overconfidence in the next chapter.  Let's wrap things up with 1 more reason Traders. Lose money and then we'll move on to chapter 7.  Failure to adopt.  Chapter 14 is all about adaptation so I don't want to front run myself here. I just wanted to include failure to adapt here because it is critical, but also different from the other reasons. For failure, I described in this chapter  Well, the reasons I covered in this chapter are generally, reasons, Traders fail at the first place. Failure to adapt is the reason. Many good Traders end up failing over time.  Some Traders are really good at 1 type of trading. Maybe it's breakout trading or Trend, following, or mean reversion cross Market, or whatever.  But a single style of trading does not work. Forever markets are by their nature, highly adaptive and efficient.  Almost by definition whenever works. Best today is unlikely to work very well in the future.  The whole process of price Discovery is built to sniff out abnormal returns.  The more people. People or algorithms discover a popular trading method, the less likely it is to work going forward.  Do not form a strong bias toward, a particular trading style, adapt to what the market is rewarding.  Markets are forever, evolving and Traders. That cannot adapt are eventually pushed over the cliff by an invisible hand.  Flexible. Open-minded, creative and humble trainers. Understand the fact that just because they're making money today, that does not entitle them to make money tomorrow. They must earn tomorrow's money by thinking harder working smarter and discovering new, and untapped sources of inefficiency or low-hanging Alpha in the market.  Before we end this chapter on Kryptonite and how to fail at trading, I'm going to take a quick detour and talk about 3 moments in my career, where I failed, then I extract the lessons.  3, big mistakes and what I learned from them.  Well, I've read most of the top. Books. The great lessons I've learned about trading have come from real life experience in this section. I go over a few specific trading experiences, that went wrong for me. I hope that reading about my mistakes will help you avoid making similar errors in the future.  1 thinking it would go on forever, 2,000.  When I was trading, the NASDAQ bubble in the late 1990s, I was in my late 20s and appropriately immature.  I took my trading account from 25,000, the only money I had at the time to more than 350,000 dollars while simultaneously using the account to pay expenses, including rent travel fun and a black M3  to give you a sense of my overconfidence at the time. Another Trader. And I called the office we worked at the faucet because all you had to do was walk in and turn it on and out, came the money, we were kind of joking but not really  trading is never easy, but the market in 1999, Was about as close to easy as trading could ever get.  A simple disciplined approach that followed momentum and headlines was fairly easy to monetize if you had confidence and some courage.  The mistake I made was thinking it would go on forever. I did not have the experience or maturity to realize that any period, where trading delivers at sized returns or easy returns is by definition. Unsustainable markets, can be inefficient for short periods, but not forever.  By the end of 2002, my Edge was gone. My account was shrinking fast, and I was out looking for a real job.  Make hay. When the sun is shining, if the Market's paying a particular style of trading lever up, as much as you reasonably can and work as many hours as you possibly can. It will not last forever.  Instead of working my butt off and squirreling away my gains. I worked when I felt like it because I thought I could come in and make money whenever I wanted. I had no sense of urgency.  The positive takeaway. Away from my dumb approach in the late 1990s, was that, when a similar moment of outstanding trading opportunity appeared in 2008, I recognized it.  I knew it was time to work as hard as humanly possible, because the period of insane volatility and fat pitches was only temporary, the tuition I paid in 1999 paid off with my best year ever in 2008.  2 failing to ride the ebonics Trend. 2012 in late 2012 DeLorean was trading near 80, while the Japanese stock market, the Nick 2225 was languishing in the 8500 area.  Japan was in a deep economic Funk, the country was on the wrong end of a multi-d decade, deflationary sucking machine. That had stopped all confidence and left an overvalued currency, and undervalued financial assets.  That all changed with the announcement of ebonics. A major economic program spearheaded by prime minister Shinzo Abe.  Ebonics. A series of initiatives that called for major structural reforms and massive monetary easing in Japan.  Over the next 3 years, the nikay index rallied 250% and dollar Yen had an eye-popping Rally from 80 to 125.  I know 3 traders that pretty much made their careers on that move.  for whatever reason, I struggled to close my eyes and go with the move, positioning became extreme very quickly as 1, might imagine when a country's leader decides to devalue, the currency and ramp the equity Market higher  I knew very well by that point in my career as I started in 1995 that when there's a major economic or policy shift positioning, doesn't matter. But for some reason, I had a mental block and struggled to go with the trend.  I had seen enough times where positioning didn't matter for extended periods, so I should have known better. For example, in 2008, the global financial crisis. Most people were short stocks. Most of the way down 2000. 10 US quantitative easing, the market went short dollars and cleaned up and 2011, the Eurozone crisis the market was short Euro all the way down, though. Punchers did get badly rinsed. When euro dollar finally bought them,  Eventually, positioning always matters but in the early and middle stages of watershed economic and policy changes, the macro is much bigger than any concern about positions.  Thing is a dollar Yen climb from 80 to 90 to 100. I struggled massively to trade from the long side, and I was playing retracements and big levels and trying to top tick, 1 of the biggest economic stories of my lifetime.  I still don't have a good sense of why I could not get myself to trade. The ebonics Trend successfully, I had various excuses, but no good understanding of where the mental block came from.  But when a similar trade showed up in 2015, ECB quantitative easing, which drove your dollar from 1 140 to 105 in pretty much a straight line. I was ready I recognize the similarity of the setup and was strict about trading Euro only from the short side, till after the pair had already dropped massively lower.  A hedge fund PM told me about how the founder of his fund and the firm's biggest risk. Taker put a Post-It note on his monitor in 2009 that said, long or flat.  At that time, the authorities had just changed all the rules. By suspending Mark to Market, Banning short-selling, bailing out, the banks bailing out, the car companies, announcing quantitative easing at Etc and he realized it was going to be impossible for stocks to go down from that moment on  I usually preach Nimmo as a key defining characteristic of successful short-term Traders.  There is however, a time to have 1 cor View and stick to it.  Identifying these rare moments where the markets will be 1 way for an extended period, can be the difference between an uninspired trading, career and a great 1.  And mistake. Number 3 that I made Sprint. Ing out of the gates 1 recent December after a decent training year, I decided I was going to try something different in the new year. I'd been pretty consistent over the previous 5 or 6 years, putting up. Excellent, but not amazing, yearly p&l and I thought I've hit a plateau. I want to do something bigger, trade bigger, double last year's p&l. So instead of starting slowly and building a base of p&l before adding meaningful risk, I took a different approach.  It just so happened that I had a very strong view that the dollar would sell off in the new year. So I decided to go all in right off the bat, and take a ton of risk on January 1.  Take a guess. What happened? I got. Absolutely crushed. Losing half of my prior years, pnl. In the first 4 weeks.  This put me in a devastating hole where I could barely trade for a while, as I scraped back and precariously avoided getting to the point where I would need to worry about my year to date. Stop loss sprinting out of the gates is a bad strategy. No matter how strong your view at the start of the year, there's too much path, dependence involved. If you go hard on day 1, even if you're placing what you think is an 80/20 bet. If that 20% comes up, you're so hobbled that you threaten your entire year. It's not worth the risk. You're essentially betting your entire year on a small sample. This is not good.  I spent the next 6 months, scratching back to flat and managed to finish up a tiny bit on the air, but those 11 months were a grueling and painful Marathon the following year, needless to say, I started with smaller risk and successfully built a base before taking on larger risk.  Sometimes you have to do the wrong thing to be reminded, why you need to do the right thing, you cannot make your year in January, but you can lose it, learn from my mistake start, slow build the base, and be like a call option with limited downside and unlimited upside, we'll dig into the concepts of path, dependence and risk management in Chapter 11.  Okay, that completes chapter 6 and that ends our initial discussion of Trader Kryptonite. Now let's take even deeper and talk about bias and irrational behavior. And how Traders can recognize and avoid bad thinking and bad habits.  Chapter 7.  1 of the great. Aha moments of my life, was the realization not so many years ago. That smart people still do stupid things all the time.  Once you recognize this, the world starts to make a lot more sense, as You observe both your own actions. Assuming you are smart and the actions of others.  In this chapter, we will delve into some of the ways that even the smartest Traders act irrationally and then we'll try to find remedies for these biased behaviors.  In chapter 3 you learned that Superior performance. On the cognitive reflection test CRT predicts trading success.  In other words, traders that rely on system 1 and curist thinking fast will underperform traders that favor system 2 and logic thinking slow.  There's a conundrum here though, trading requires fast decision-making.  The alpha Trader needs to make quick decisions that are not contaminated by behavioral bias.  There is an inherent conflict here, obviously because fast thinking generally relies more on shortcuts while slower, thinking relies more on rational logic in this section, we'll discuss a host of Behavioral biases and then think about how to counter them.  High performing Traders, understand behavioral bias, and are self-aware about how their own bias negatively impacts their decision-making. They know that even the best most knowledgeable Trader is subject to many types of Behavioral bias.  The amazing thing about most behavioral bias, is that? It works on you. Even if you know about it, this is similar to the way optical illusions work, even if you've been told about the exact way. Your thoughts are malfunctioning, it doesn't matter.  I can tell you, there are no gray dots in the intersections in the image in the PDF, which is an optical illusion, but you'll see them. Anyway, you're a silly human, just like the rest of us.  Trader biased. Number 1, overconfidence.  Quote, the only thing, I'm 100% sure of is that anyone who is 100% sure of anything is not worth listening to end. Quote, Matt Gittens, well-known FX, spirit guide, 2019,  As mentioned in part 1, overconfidence is the most important and most devastating bias in trading the line between confidence and overconfidence is way for thin.  Confidence is critical, but overconfidence is deadly.  If you think all your trades are 5-star, Home, run amazeballs ideas, your ability to determine the expected value of those trades is likely to be hampered by this overly rose-colored view of the trades prospects.  Overconfidence leads to overtrading, poor assessments of probability and rigid closed-minded assessments.  Overconfident Traders are also less likely to explore alternative hypotheses and will Embrace confirmatory information, much more openly than contradictory info.  Over confident, Traders, take too much risk trade too frequently. Behave recklessly make poor assessments of probability, do not keep an open mind, overweight evidence that confirms their idea and ignore evidence, that does not.  Fail to consider alternative hypotheses and refuse to admit when they are wrong.  in the 2020, Super Bowl, the San Francisco 49ers were up 13 to 10 early in the fourth quarter, they Intercepted a pass to take a commanding 20 to 10 lead and the entire 49ers defense ran into the end zone for a showoff, fee celebration and team photograph.  Even if you're not an NFL football fan, you can probably guess what happened next. The opposing quarterback, Patrick Mahomes put up, 21 straight points, Kansas City Chiefs won, 3120, and Mahomes is now 1 of the best quarterbacks of all time. The San Francisco 49ers were Reckless and loose. They failed to consider the alternative hypothesis that they might lose.  A less cocky team in that spot would be thinking about finishing and winning the Super Bowl not assembling like a group of clowns. In the end zone while the opposing Team game plans the next possession.  There's nothing more dangerous than a team that celebrates as if they won the championship before the game's over. By the same token, there's no Trader. More likely to dump a huge wad of cash than the 1 who pumps his fist. Celebrating a Trade. He has not squared up yet.  Perhaps surprisingly research shows that the more difficult a task, the more overconfident people tend to be this is obviously a problem when it comes to finance. Given its extraordinary challenges research shows that training and experience can reduce miscalibration of confidence, but only to a minor degree you must appreciate and understand that we all tend toward overconfidence, remain, humble and do your best to consider. What you don't know or might be missing in a given situation.  For a fascinating read on overconfidence and miscalibration. Google  Calibration of probabilities the state of art to 1980 by Likens fish off in Phillips. Not only is the paper full of interesting. Insights, it was scanned from a typewritten document presented to the US Navy in 1981. So it has a cool retro Vibe and it's not boring.  There are 3 types of overconfidence. 1 overestimation, where people tend to overestimate, how well they perform at a task 2 over placement where people grossly, overestimate their rank or placement among others.  This is also known as the better than average effect. Most individuals think of themselves as better than average at most tasks. Even though it is not mathematically possible for more than 50% of individuals to be better than average.  There has been considerable research on this topic. 1 of the earliest studies show that 93% of people surveyed in the US and 69% of swedes, thought they were better than average drivers.  And 3 miscalibration, this occurs, when an individual believes, his ability to estimate something. Say the price of a stock is better than the reality. His confidence interval, should be wide, but it's narrow.  Research shows that overconfidence can have positive consequences in many aspects of life. Overconfidence helps with Ambition morale, persistence and helps individuals signal, a better than reality level of skill or knowledge to peers.  Overconfident people are viewed by peers as more confident than properly calibrated people.  On the other hand, when it comes to trading and investing overconfidence is unambiguously negative.  There's so much research showing that overconfidence leads to negative outcomes in both trading and investing that. It's hard to know where to begin.  The first study I want to discuss uses miscalibration to assess subjects potential overconfidence and then Compares that to their trading performance. A standard psychological questionnaire to measure calibration asks, subjects to give a low and high estimate for difficult questions. Such as Martin Luther King's age at death, length of the Nile River in Miles, number of countries, that are members of OPEC number of books in the Old Testament, or wait of an Empty Boeing 747 and so on.  Properly, calibrated individuals will write down low to high ranges that include the correct answer. Most of the time overconfident or miscalibrated individuals will answer with ranges that are too tight and often do not include the correct answer.  in the study subject miscalibration was measured and then subjects were grouped into quartiles from most to least miscalibrated  the subjects were then placed in an experimental asset trading Market. At the end, trading profits were checked against miscalibration to check for a relationship. As you might, guess there was a strong relationship, miscalibrated individuals performed, worse and well-calibrated individuals killed it. And there's a graphic in the PDF if you want to see the relative differences.  this gets at the idea of knowing what you know and knowing what you don't know if you have no idea about an answer, you should answer with an extremely Wide range people that don't have a good understanding of their own lack of knowledge perform poorly in this trading experiment and I believe these experimental results match real life outcomes. It's important to know what you know and also to be humble about what you don't know, as Mark Twain or Josh Billings or someone once said,  It ain't what, you don't know. That gets you into trouble. It's what, you know, for sure. That just ain't so  Alpha Traders have intellectual humility.  Prolonged time in the market, inevitably beats the overconfidence out of you traders, who have survived for many years. Understand that, no matter how smooth the sailing is right now, there's always another storm just over the horizon no matter how much, you know, you barely know anything.  The study, I just referenced shows a direct connection between miscalibration and trading performance. There's often a more indirect connection to as overconfidence leads to overtrading. Which reduces performance through higher commission or bid offer, spread paid plus reduced trade selectivity.  Patient. Well, calibrated and aggressive Traders will trade less often than inpatient traders. Who always think the market is wrong and they are right.  Properly, calibrated Traders, understand the public signal. The market price is probably correct, most of the time and they need a very strong reason before believing in the superiority of Their Own Private signal, their alternative view of where the price should be or where it's going.  If the market was always right, you could never make money. On the other hand, markets are generally, very efficient. They are usually right? Or correct themselves quickly.  You should always give the market the benefit of the doubt and think about what you might be missing before you decide to challenge the wisdom of the crowd by entering a trade.  Another excellent study conducted in 2001 looked at 6 years worth of retail discount brokerage trading records for more than 35,000 households. The study concluded that men executed, 45% more trades than women, and this overtrading, was the primary reason women outperformed men by about 1% in net returns?  In another study researchers measured subjects confidence and then set up 10%, they constructed some markets of overconfident Traders and some of people with a more rational view of their own abilities prices in the rational Market tracked, the fundamental asset value. Fairly accurately, while the market of overconfident Traders, saw higher prices greater volatility, higher trading volumes and more bubbles.  Anyone watching the NASDAQ in 1999 or Bitcoin in 2017 and 2021 can see how this experiment is an accurate reflection of reality overconfident Traders, think they are right? And the market is wrong, they overvalue their own opinions private signal and underweight. The market price, the Public signal, the majority of the research shows that women are less overconfident than men and that they outperform men in trading and investing. Quote, girls are not necessarily less confident than boys, but rather, they are less overconfident end quote.  And another quote from another study quote, although both men and women were overconfident undergraduate, men were especially overconfident. When incorrect end quote  That last quote is from a paper called highly confident, but wrong. What a great title, it makes me smile. And here's the conclusion of an even more, topical study,  quote, this paper studies performance predictions in the 7 item cognitive reflection test CRT and whether they differ by gender,  After participants, completed the CRT, they predicted their own the other participants men's and women's number of correct answers.  In keeping with exam. Existing literature, men scored higher on the CRT than women and both men and women were too optimistic about their own performance. When we compare gender specific predictions, we observed, that men think they perform significantly better than other men and do so significantly, more than women end quote.  That quote is particularly relevant because it comes from a study of gender. Differences related to the cognitive reflection. Test recall, the CRT is the test. We covered in chapter 4 performance on the CRT is evidence of rationality and predicts trading success.  A well-calibrated estimate of CRT performance is also likely to predict trading success.  There's a strange irony that aggressive type. A males are often attracted to trading and this subcategory is in general most likely to be overconfident  Then again it also makes sense. Risk-seeking, behaviors and overconfidence tend to go to Together. If you think you're Invincible, you take more risk. While less overconfident but risk, averse individuals are not interested in, or likely to be good at Trading.  There's much more research I could present but I think you get the 2 main points 1. Women outperform men in trading mostly because they're less overconfident and 2 overconfident Traders trade too much and underperform those with well-calibrated confidence.  How to combat overconfidence, 1 respect the market, the Market's not always right, but it is not often wrong.  2, do a pre-mortem on your trades, picture, the trade going wrong and see if you can imagine what might have caused the failure. This puts you in the mindset opposite to overconfidence, instead of assuming it's the best trade ever and you're smarter than the market, you assume it's a failure and ask yourself, why?  3 be aggressively open-minded and stay humble.  No matter how. Confident. You are there's still a good chance. You are wrong. Embrace the fact that part of being a good Trader is accepting that you will frequently be wrong. Daniel Nero 1 of the best poker players in the world still loses many. Many hands.  And 4 bounce trade ideas off people, you respect, I send out my trade ideas every day and the feedback I get is tremendously useful. On many levels first people that disagree with me, will present reasons they disagree, and I can assess these reasons and recalibrate my confidence level. If the reasons are strong enough, I might even change my mind or exit the trade.  Second, I get a good sense of sentiment. If everyone agrees with me, the market is most likely positioned that way already.  If everyone disagrees, I'm probably in the minority position and if I can comfortably rebut the counter arguments, my idea is more powerful.  Trader bias. Number 2, overtrading. Trading can be incredibly fun, that's good but that's also a problem enjoyment. Should always be a side benefit of trading and not the primary objective. The first objective must always be profit.  Very often Traders will get involved in the Market at a boredom or out of a need for stimulation. This gets them into trades that have weak or no logic and low or negative expected value. Remember tight aggressive look for juicy, low-hanging, fruit and pluck it. Don't climb up into the Treetops and risk a big fall, be patient.  How powerful is trading as a stimulant very, this is from a 2001 study quote.  The psychological processes, underlying the anticipation and experience of monetary prospects and outcomes would appear to play an important role in gambling. And in other behaviors, that entail decision-making under uncertainty  in this regard, it is striking that the the activation seen in the NAC slea VT and gob  in response to monetary prospects and outcomes overlap. Those observed in response to cocaine infusions in subjects addicted to cocaine.  Case, you're wondering nacla VT and Gob are 4, reward related brain regions.  And the following is from Andrew lows testimony to Congress on hedge funds, systemic risk and the crisis of 2007 2008.  Quote.  The same neural circuitry that responds to cocaine food and sex. The mesolimbic dopamine reward system that releases dopamine in the nucleus has been shown to be activated by monetary gains as well.  Both the anticipation and receipt of monetary gains, trigger the reward, circuitry of the brain.  Human nature is to seek activation of this circuitry, both consciously and unconsciously.  You must come to grips. With the fact that trading often involves sitting there doing nothing, just waiting for a great opportunity. Unfortunately, the number is moving up and down on that screen are like squirrels and you are a dog.  Various commentators including Jean. Paul sap have commented that war is hours of boredom interspersed with moments of Terror.  Trading, can often be the same, there's a strange temporal Rhythm to trading where time speeds up and slows down depending on what is going on.  I remember instance, is after a major economic announcement, or Market event where I did 5 or 6, big trades got into a position and out of a position and made hundreds of thousands of dollars. The time that elapsed at felt like about 15 minutes then later in the day, when things were quiet, I'd go. Look at the 1 minute chart and could not see enough detail to capture what had happened. I'd have to go to a 1. Second chart to see the levels at which I did those 5 or 6 trades and I would realize the entire sequence which felt like 15 minutes actually took more like 90 seconds.  This time dilation is a common feature in Sports military, action, trading and other fast-moving, Pursuits that require rapid fire high-stakes decision-making.  Of course, the stakes are much higher in the military but the mental effect where time slows down is similar.  Once you get that feeling of excitement that in the zone moments, where the p&l piles up so fast, you can't believe your eyes, you want that Feeling Again? Problem is you can't get that feeling by trading low probability setups.  Instead, those low EV trades. Give you that. Why did I do that feeling? You can't trade to chase a rush. Your only goal each day should be to maximize p&l in 2018, Stephen Brown of NYU conducted a cool study where they dug through vehicle ownership records and found the make and model of a car driven by more than a thousand hedge fund managers.  then they compared Fund performance to car type and Down this intuitive result.  Using a novel data set of automobile, purchases by hedge fund managers. This paper exploits cross-sectional variation in vehicle attributes to investigate the effects of sensation seeking on investment Behavior.  We argue that the purchase of a powerful sports car signals the intent to drive in a spirited fashion and therefore conveys a propensity for sensation seeking.  A results empirically validate, the advice given by some hedge fund allocators, to avoid managers who drive fancy sports cars. We find that managers who own performance cars, take on more investment risk than do other managers without being compensated with higher returns, therefore performance car owners, deliver lower sharp and information ratios than do non-performance car owners.  The incremental risk taken by sports car Enthusiast extends, Beyond financial markets to the fund operations Arena. Sensation, Seekers are more likely To terminate their funds disclose violations, on their form advs and exhibit, greater operational risk, sensation seeking also shapes trading Behavior, managers who Embrace powerful, sports, cars, trade, more frequently, actively and unconventionally then do managers who issue such cars. They also gravitate toward lottery-like stocks. Trading hurts the performance of sensation Seekers more than it hurts, the performance of sensation avoiders end quote,  And 1 more quick excerpt quote, sports car. Drivers underperform non-sports. Car drivers by 2.92% per year while minivan drivers. Outperform non-, minivan drivers by 3.22% per year. End quote, Jesse Livermore did not drive a minivan. This is more evidence that you can be risk, averse and still succeed as a Trader. The researchers also found that hedge fund managers who received more speeding Markets also underperformed, which is consistent with the idea of sensation seeking leading to more risk but not better returns.  Other studies also confirm sensation seeking Traders, over trade, pay more commission and perform worse than nonsens Traders.  You need to be honest with yourself.  Just like it's okay to be risk, averse. It's okay to be sensation, seeking, or boredom reverse.  You just need to be aware of it and Institute a set of rules to control your behavior and manage your weaknesses.  You also need to accept that this sensation seeking or disinhibition is a weakness. You will need to deal with throughout your career.  Attitudes towards risk are highly innate and very difficult to modify. Even with the healthiest, most growth oriented mindset.  Sensation, seeking and gambling, often go hand in hand to get a sense of whether you are trading to feed your desire for excitement. Listen to the following excerpt from the dsm5. The dsm5 is the diagnostic statistical Manual of mental disorders.  It contains descriptions symptoms and other criteria for identifying mental disorders and it is the authoritative guide to mental illness throughout most of the world.  Here, I've taken the section on identifying gambling disorder, previously known as pathological, gambling, and replace the word gambling with trading. Do any of these line items sound familiar to you a diagnosis of gambling or in this case trading disorder requires at least 4 of the following during the last year?  1 need to trade with increasing amount of money to achieve the desired. Excitement, 2, Restless or irritable when trying to cut down or stop Trading.  3, repeated unsuccessful attempts to control cut back on or stop Trading.  4. Frequent thoughts about trading such as reliving, past trading experiences, planning the next trade thinking of ways to get money to trade 5 often trading, when feeling distressed 6, after losing money trading often returning to get even referred to as chasing 1's losses.  7, lying to conceal trading activity. 8, Jeopardy, or losing a significant relationship job or educational career opportunity because of trading and 9 relying on others to help with money problems caused by Trading.  Many Traders would recognize their own thought patterns in that list, a Trader who scores himself as 10 out of 10 for risk. Appetite might see himself in 5 or 6 of those behaviors.  Think about these criteria for gambling disorder and be honest with yourself about how trading impacts your life.  It should be an enjoyable, intellectually stimulating profession, not a way to achieve a gambler's.  Jesse Livermore is celebrated as a trading hero, but it is worth remembering that he took his own life after going bankrupt for a third time after a second divorce. He's a trading hero and a cautionary, tale wrapped into 1.  The process in mechanics of trading and gambling overlap. Both involve risk management, probability Randomness risk of Ruin emotion, bias, and irrational human beings.  Bad trading. Can often be very much like casino gambling. It's impulsive emotional and has a negative expected value.  Excellent trading deals with incomplete information and variance of a game like Blackjack but has a positive expected value like a professional poker player at a table of weaker opponents.  1 final note here, the term gambling usually describes a form of entertainment, where the gambler's odds or expectation are negative, some forms of gambling, like poker can have a positive expectation. If the player is highly skilled, I would say that when a highly skilled and highly disciplined poker player sits down at a table full of tourists or recreational poker players that is not gambling.  The skilled player has a significant mathematical Edge. Poker is much closer to trading than most forms of gambling because it offers a small group of Highly skilled players, the ability to generate abnormal returns consistently.  In other words, poker is skill, not luck research confirms this unequivocally.  I think it's interesting that research also shows that hedge fund managers who are skilled in Texas Holdem, outperform those who are not  Here's the conclusion. Reached by  We find that hedge fund managers who do well in poker tournaments have significantly. Better fund performance. This effect is stronger for tournaments with more entrance, larger buy-ins, larger cash prizes. And for managers who win, multiple tournaments, suggesting poker skills are correlated with fund management skills like Taylor and billions. This further solidifies the skill link between poker and trading and separates them from luck-based gambling, such as roulette craps and mostly blackjack.  Trading like poker involves significant variance and path. Dependence, but long-run outcomes are primarily driven by skill.  We will talk much more about skill luck and variance in chapter 11. For now remember, if you want to gamble, go to a casino  A substantial portion of investor underperformance. Can be explained simply by the fact that investors are active when they should be doing nothing.  This is proven again and again by the consistent and sizable outperformance of index funds versus active managers and by the poor returns in retail accounts, most of the time you should be doing nothing.  this is a simple concept, but 1 that Is extremely difficult to put into practice in real life. Your default mode should always be to do nothing.  Flat is the most powerful position in trading. When you have no position, you are unbiased ready to pounce and unconstrained, by any prior view or Notions. You are not anchored on any price or level, you are most open-minded and Nimble when you have no position,  Yet people often feel bad when they're flat, especially if they remain flat for many days, I'm not putting my Capital to work. They might think or my boss is going to think I'm lazy.  Human nature equates doing nothing with laziness and in most jobs, that's a pretty accurate assessment and employee who sits there and does nothing over. Multiple days, is probably not doing a great job in most roles  In trading though, the opposite can be true. Quite often, the trader doing nothing is the wolf waiting silently, in the long grass, ready to pounce an alpha Trader. Take pride and comfort in your ability to remain flat.  The very nature of the type aggressive framework in trading is that you should be flat as often as possible. And only engage when the expected value of a trade is high.  Flat is good. A Trader with no position, has no bias.  Now, here are some ways to combat overtrading.  1, think about your motivations for trading. Do you over trade? Why?  Self-awareness is key. Before any action can be taken to fix the problem.  2.  Create speed bumps. That must be cleared before you can trade. Maybe that means filling in a quick pre-trained checklist. Maybe it means going through an execution desk instead of pressing the buttons yourself.  If all you have to do is press a button to trade, you can easily become the lab rat. Pushing the little button for more cocaine, if you're process includes a speed bump or 2, it's harder to over trade.  The idea is to create friction. Around unwanted behaviors, for example, I find when I leave my orders with a broker, I'm much less likely to cancel them than. If I watch them myself could be rude or annoying to cancel a closed order with a broker. And so the bar to cancel is higher, this is good.  You should not be canceling, your take-profit sell order just because it looks bid, it always looks bid at the High.  At 1 particular bank. I worked at we had the ability to trade at any time through an app on our phones, most other Banks did not have that functionality.  As you might expect the ability to trade on your phone was incredibly convenient, but it also led to overtrading. It takes particularly High conviction for me to contact a Trader in Hong Kong, or London to put a trade on, but if all I need to do is open my phone and press a couple of buttons. I am much more likely to put on a trade that pops into my head at whatever time of night.  A good trading process, usually involves some sort of written trade plan. It's not always. Is practical to completely write up a trade before you put it on given that short-term trading often requires quick thinking and Rapid execution.  That said once you have the trade on, you usually have plenty of time to write it up afterwards by doing. So you justify the trade, you game plan it, and you may find out the trade was a dumb idea before you get stopped out.  Have the flexibility to get right back out of a trade. If you realize, as you write it up, that the idea is weak.  Create hurdles and barriers between you and the market. If you can trade with a single click, you're going to trade more. If you can trade on your phone at 3:00 a.m. and your phone is on, you'll trade more. If you need to convene a 10-person investment committee to vote on a new investment, you're going to trade less if you need to log into Bloomberg or call someone at 3:00 a.m. in order to execute, you will trade less.  Obviously this is a Continuum and there can be huge negatives to slowing down your process too. But knowing that overtrading and too much. Activity is the biggest leak for many Traders.  What can you do to slow down your execution process? What is the right balance of speed accessibility and restraint and selective Trading?  I would say it's too easy for most people to trade. Can you create a trading framework that allows you to express your views but that also constrains any impulsive urge to jump into new trades or out of existing ones.  3, stop staring at the screen.  Take a break from the screen once in a while staring up. Price action will lead to sub-optimal, decisions triggered by Price action and random noise. Once you have a position on let it breathe price. Action is mostly meaningless.  Staring at the screen UPS. The amount of stimulus, you receive each day and may lead to excess action.  4 set a maximum number of Trades. Period. This needs to be logical and based on your trading history, answer this question when I'm Trading. Well, how many trades do I execute per day or per week? Then set a maximum that you feel is close to Optimal a lower. Number forces, you to be more selective and tight aggressive. On the other hand your returns will suffer. If you set the limit too low market conditions, should be the primary determinant of when and how much you trade. But a maximum trades. Figure anchors you around the appropriate level of activity.  My time Horizon is short and my trades usually, last 1 hour to 3 days. If I take more than 2 or 3 positions in a day. I'm usually overtrading as a market maker. I tend to trade much more than an average hedge fund pm and this has become a bad habit for me at times client trades. Provide a convenient, excuse for a market maker to take on risk. That makes no sense.  Instead of covering a client trade for a small profit or loss, the Temptation can be to justify the position and ride it. It's the endowment effect. Again we overvalue trade We have on, it's dumb but we all do it.  A similar rule you can set for yourself which is easier to follow. If you're mostly a day, trader is to set a maximum number of line items. When I was day, trading stocks, I never had more than 3 positions. There's a good reason for this. When things go wrong, it's hard to manage 14 line items in your book. And anyway, most Traders will find there's a high correlation between their positions  instead of spreading yourself thin focus on 1 or 2 core positions and put all your risk where it belongs diversification has benefits in investing, but good trading is all about concentrated risk.  5, when you put on a trade established firm stop-loss, take profit and reassessment triggers then. Do your very best not to take the trade-off before 1 of them hits.  Over trading doesn't just mean, putting on too many trades often. It means taking off trades, prematurely for no reason. Hard to stick with the trade when nothing's going on. But remember that most of the movement in a security comes in short bursts of activity? That take very little time. Most of the time is boring, random drift.  Let's say, you spend an hour analyzing spreadsheets thinking about positioning, planning, out your trade, Etc. Your idea is solid. All the planets are aligned and you decide it's time to go short. Then Corporation vnn. Let's go.  You sell a thousand shares of Venn risking 1% to make 3% 2 hours later. The market is quiet, vins been stuck in a tiny range and you're bored.  A random headline comes out, that's vaguely bullish. When events competitors and a flash of a thought crosses your mind that Venn might rally in sympathy. You press a few buttons and cut the trade.  The stock rallies 30 cents then drops a buck as the market decides, the story is good for the competitor, but bad for ven. Now, your trade idea should have been 70 cents in the Funny. And instead you cut for reasons, you don't even really truly understand. You're now in a tricky position. Do you get back in at worst levels or just forget about it?  man if this thing drops, 3% this afternoon, then the evil voice in your head starts and you know it's going to drop because you cut like a chicken  If you had input your stop loss and your take profit in an automated system and controlled your impulsive desire to press buttons, things would be so much better. Remember, once you have a position on you are estimating hot by a stew. Your first assumption should always be the original. Plan was the best.  Stick to the original plan, unless material, new information, emerges, or better. Yet just stick to your original parameters every time.  Share a new information might matter but your interpretation of new information. Once you have a position on is often biased always err on the side of in action.  When you have a position on you should. Almost always write it out until the stop-loss or take-profit hits. Not always but almost always  6.  If you have a constant need for activity, find Productive Outlets every time you have an idea for a back test, trading, strategy or analysis, write it down, so that you have a list of projects to pursue when you're bored.  I'm constantly jotting stuff down like, what hour of the day has the highest volume in dollar Yen. Does Bitcoin outperform on weekends, Etc. Then when I'm bored, I can work on these questions and sitting there. Twitching, as I try to keep my fingers off the buy and sell buttons.  when in doubt do nothing,  there's a fascinating 1975 essay by Charles Ellis called The Losers game. It's mostly fascinating. Because even back in 1975, it was obvious and easily proven with data that active management, of investment portfolios, consistently underperformed passive management This is still true today but for some reason, it took the world about 40 years to catch on. And now money is finally flooding out of active funds and into passive indexes.  The essay is worth a read, there's some great analogies in it and it goes into some detail on why active will underperform Passive by definition due to transaction costs?  Later in this book. I'll show just how dramatic transaction costs are as a drag on your performance. The more you trade, the more money you leak. Remember this all other things being equal. It is a fundamental truth of trading and investing the more you trade, the more you pay,  Make fewer higher quality decisions. This is the essence of the tight aggressive way. This is a core behavior of the alpha Trader.  Trader bias, number 3, confirmation bias. Quote faced with the choice of changing 1's, mind or proving that there's no need to do. So almost everyone gets busy on the proof. End quote, John Kenneth Galbraith.  There's a good chance you already know about confirmation bias. It's 1 of the best known and most discussed forms of bias out there it is most discussed because it is critically important and hard to fight even when you understand it.  Confirmation bias is the tendency for humans to seek and incorporate information that supports their pre-existing View and ignore or reject information. That does not  Instead of impartially evaluating new evidence in the search for unbiased conclusions about the market, people tend to stick to their current View and then look for evidence to support it while ignoring evidence that does not.  While Kahneman and tversky tend to be the names, we most associate with behavioral bias confirmation bias was discovered by British psychologist, Peter Watson. His experiment was simple, he gave the subjects, the series, 2, 4 6, then told them it sat, Ified his pattern rule.  He then told subjects they could construct other sets of 3 numbers to test their assumptions, about the pattern rule each time, the subject showed the experimenter, their 3 numbers, the experimenter would tell them whether or not it satisfied. The pattern rule until the subject was confident. They figured out the rule  Subjects would test, either a series like, 8 101, 12 satisfies, the rule and 22 24/26, satisfies the rule or 369, satisfies the rule and 51015 satisfies the rule or 4812 or 10 2030, they all satisfy the rule till eventually most would answer that the pattern rule is either.  Count up by twos, count up by some multiple sum formula, like add the first 2 numbers to get the third number.  But whatever, answer people came to they tended to get an idea and then test it over and over and over till they were certain it was right what they did not do. Generally was tried deliberately wrong sequences to see if those might work.  The actual pattern rule was any 3 numbers that increase in value. Anyone that tested 1 123 for example would have instantly ruled out all 3 patterns, I just listed above  But subjects were always busy, testing patterns, that fit their rule without ever thinking to test those that did not.  Instead of looking for more and more evidence that their hypothesis was correct, they should have tried sequences that did not fit their hypothesis in a test to invalidate. It look harder for evidence and arguments against your hypothesis.  Confirmation bias is 1 of the most harmful bugs in human reasoning. You see it everywhere in media and on Twitter, as consumers of information ignore competing views in augment, their existing opinions with more and more confirmatory evidence.  The concept is especially disruptive in trading and investing because it inhibits, good thinking, Access into a view and blocks out. Useful non-conforming information.  Also, other types of bias such as the endowment effect work together with confirmation bias and make it very difficult for investors to change their mind. Once they take a position in the market, you see confirmation bias in action, almost every day on a trading floor,  Example, you've been following zap, Corp for months and you bought the stock at good levels. Everyone's been excitedly waiting for the hot news zap fidget phone to come out a headline hits. Zap reports 90-day fidget phone launch delay due to supplier issues  An unbiased Market, Watcher might think that is bearish, the stock drops 4%, but you're a fan of Zap, you're long, the stock and you might think something more like, man, this isn't news phones still coming out, it's not even zaps fault. This is an overreaction. The Stock's going to bounce.  meanwhile, 2 analysts downgrade, the stock they Say, this is further evidence that zaps supply chain is overly reliant on a single chip supplier in Vietnam. And that the supplier is severely mismanaged. The stock drops, another 4%. You might think, man, I can't believe how much the Market's overreacting here,  On the other hand, bears are probably yelling. I knew this was going to happen.  How to combat confirmation bias?  1 read about confirmation bias.  It's 1 of the most catalogued psychological phenomena at their and the research is surprisingly interesting. Confirmation bias is powerful and kind of frightening because it's severely compromises the human capacity for reason.  For example, if you have 2 people who have opposite views on a divisive issue, like capital punishment and give them new information, here's what happens. This is an excerpt from an excellent article on confirmation bias from New Yorker magazine.  Quote, 1 of the most famous of these confirmation bias experiments was conducted. At Stanford for this experiment researchers. Rounded up a group of students who had opposing opinions about capital punishment, half the students were in favor of it and thought that it deterred crime, the other half were against it and thought it had no effect on crime.  The students were asked to respond to 2 studies 1 provided data in support of the deterrence argument and the other provided data that called it into question. Both studies, you guessed. It were made up and had been designed to present what were objectively speaking equally compelling statistics.  The students who had originally supported capital punishment, rated, the pro deterrence data, highly credible and the anti-drunk. Convincing the students who originally opposed capital punishment, did the reverse at the end of the experiment. The students were asked once again about their views,  those who'd started out Pro capital punishment were now even more in favor of it. Those who deposed, it were even more hostile. End quote.  I found over the years that the more deeply I read about confirmation bias, the more easily. I can see it happening to me in real time. I've realized mid-sentence, sometimes that I'm shooting down the importance of a headline simply because I'm positioned the wrong way.  The longer you trade. The more you'll notice that when news comes out and you are flat, you react quickly and without bias when news comes out that goes against your view and position, you'll often hesitate or freeze or explain away the news watching yourself, make a decision influenced by confirmation bias in real time is the first step toward beating the problem till you see yourself doing it. You have not really recognized how confirmation bias negatively impacts your decision-making.  2 actively consider other hypotheses. We talked about this in chapter 5. If you can spend 2 hours, reading reports, and studying charts and coming up with a thesis on why you want to buy pump tech stock. Can't you at least take 15 minutes? Minutes to think about why not to buy it.  Or even better. Think about the reasons you might want to go short pom Tech, this intellectual exercise greatly strengthens your trade ideas because if you can come up with 5, good reasons to short pom Tech at this point, your bull case, weakens, if you can only think of 2 and have good rebuttals to both, that's more like it.  and finally, if you can think of exactly zero reasons, anyone would want a short punch, you're thinking is probably biased and you better ask around  step outside yourself and protect your analyst forced to write a bearish piece about pump tech. What might it say? While many smart, individuals are happy to play Devil's Advocate. Whenever they hear someone else's ideas, they are often unable to poke holes in their own logic.  Not only does actively considering other sides of the story help deal with confirmation bias. It can also help you later on, if the facts of the story start to change, you may recognize the competing hypotheses. Coming true and your hypothesis, losing steam, having explored, the bearish case, you're more likely to recognize it when it comes along as opposed to remaining blind to it or shrugging it off. Once you have a great trade idea, poke, some holes in it for a few minutes.  3, be a Bayesian.  Think about the world now as your prior and commit to updating as new information comes in  If today, you think the probability that Italy leaves the Euro Zone in the next 12 months is only 10% and that's a big reason you're bullish Euro. Adjust your probability honestly as new information comes in, don't just scan the news for bullish stories about Italy and skip over the bad news that sounds silly, but it's exactly what people do.  Read both sides of the story and continuously, adjust, your world view, when you have a solid grip on Bayesian thinking, you'll suffer less from confirmation bias and Bayesian thinking is fully explained in chapter 5.  4, Create a quick pros and Sheet for any trade that involves meaningful risk. This is such a simple exercise and your mom probably told you about it. When you were 11 still, it's effective when I'm making a major decision. New job, new home, kids school, Etc. I always create a list of pros and cons, quite often. The decision becomes much easier afterward because the result of the pros cons list is so clear, research shows, this simple. Procedure produces a market Improvement in the appropriateness of confidence, judgments  I do the same thing when I'm writing about trade ideas. Once I'm done, writing my thesis or trade idea in AMX, I spend a few minutes trying to take the other side. This is important because I'm sending my ideas out to thousands of people and I don't want to look stupid but it's also part of a strong intellectual process and sound trade idea, development questions. I asked.  Why might this trade not work? What are the key assumptions I have made? What are the key risks to the idea? What might go wrong?  Imagine the trade as it. Crashes and burns what happened. Sometimes by imagining the adverse scenario, we can tease out risks, we might have missed. This is the pre-mortem concept. Discussed in the section on overconfidence.  In the climactic, rap battle in the movie. 8 Mile. Papa Duck wins. The coin toss and elects to let be rabbit M&M go first.  Eminem uses the stealing Thunder technique to bring up and tear down and run through every insult. That is opponent might possibly use on him by the time Papa Doc hits the stage. There's nothing left to say, Eminem refuted every possible argument. Papa Duck could have made.  Your trade idea should be like that, you know, the contrary view so. Well you can dissect and refute it better than anyone else.  5. If you have a particularly strong economic worldview, don't get sucked into the echo chambers. That support, specific narrative. Too often the Bears, read only bearish material, while the Bulls are plugged only into cheerleading analysts.  Gold and Bitcoin Bulls can spend the whole day reading, bullish forecasts and stories on the internet, but they will laugh off anything bearish with those guys. Don't get it, don't be like that.  Give weight to and spend time evaluating credible opposing viewpoints don't look into 1 view, its intellectually lazy and can be hazardous to both your wealth and your creditability.  Discount, the views and Analysis of anyone who always has the same view.  There's a reason I sign off AMX. Each day with good luck, be nimble.  Intellectually Nimble is the best mindset for successful Trading.  It's important to know that confirmation bias is not strongly related to intelligence. This is consistent with the idea that rational thinking and intelligence are not the same thing that should be 1 of your main takeaways from this book. Smart people, do stupid things. All the time.  To succeed in trading, you can't just be smart. You have to be rational.  You've probably spent most of your life getting smarter now. It's time to train yourself to be more rational to quote from an article titled. Why intelligent people do foolish things quote  The absence of knowledge in areas important to rational thought creates a MindWare Gap. These important areas are not adequately assessed by typical intelligence tests.  MindWare necessary for rational thinking is often missing from the formal education. Curriculum, It's Not Unusual for individuals to graduate from college with minimal knowledge, in areas that are crucial for the development of rational thinking, end quote,  Everyone, including you suffers from confirmation bias.  Trader bias? Number 4, extrapolation.  1 thing you learned after 5 years or so of working on Wall Street is that most for Tests. You read are simply extrapolations of the current trend.  In the PDF. I show a few good examples, but I could literally make 100 of these charts and then 100 more. If I had more time,  the first chart shows euro dollar in black and the average FX strategist, euro dollar forecast in dotted gray. If you look closely, you can see the forecast simply follows the trend and turns, when the price of euro dollar turns, the forecast is useless. This is a concept. You should get used to. If you piled up all the research showing humans cannot forecast accurately, it would stretch to the Moon.  I strongly recommend you read super forecasting by tetlock and Gardener to get a full grasp of The Perils of forecasting. It's 1 of the best books I've ever read.  These kind of charts are comical to me, but it's even funnier when you see it in real time.  In 2017, Emmanuel macron, won the presidency in France. And this was Seen as a bullish development, for the Euro Euro dollars, started trending higher, and every analyst set a topside Target of 115 or 120.  When euro dollar rallied to 120 fairly quickly forecasters, did not say mission accomplished. They simply raised their for to 1.25. When it got to 1:25, they raised their forecasts to 1:30.  In the middle of the chart, you can see where euro dollar peaked and you see the black line, crashes lower, which is the price of euro dollar, then the forecasts follow a few months later as Euro dollars sold off. Hard from 1 125 to 118 analysts climbed over each other to lower their forecasts for months and months and months. That's not forecasting. That's extrapolation.  The default and Easy View to take in the market and in the world is to assume that whatever is going on right now, will continue. But that is often not how the real world Works periods. About performance are very often followed by reverse. Version to the mean.  This is the logical explanation for the sophomore, Jinx, the cheer hedge, the Sports Illustrated Jinx and the magazine cover indicator.  A theme or Market move that has become such an important story that it landed on. A magazine cover has probably outperformed in a major way. And thus, is more likely to revert to the mean, than to further outperformed its already stellar outperformance.  In markets, there's another reason why price reverts to the mean extremely low or high prices change the supply, and demand profile for the asset.  If oil goes to 100 New rigs, come on board, and increase Supply. And this pushes the price lower. If oil goes to 20 people, buy more fuel guzzling trucks because gas is cheaper this increase in demand for gasoline eventually pushes oil prices back up. If the price of corn, triples companies will substitute other Commodities that are cheaper and so on  Watch for changes in supply and demand in your market after a large price change. Changes our medium or long-term sellers or buyers entering the market to take advantage of high or low prices.  This change in participant Behavior. Can mark the beginning of the end of a trend?  the number 1 input into almost every forecast is the current level and trend of the asset  There are notable exceptions like everyone mostly called for higher us yields for 40 years, even as they trended lower. But generally you will see that when something is going up, its forecasts to go up more. When something's going down, forecasters expect it to keep going down.  Extrapolation bias is a form of recency bias. Humans tend to overweight more recent information in most analysis, simply because that information is more available or top of mind.  Events from years ago are harder to remember and incorporate.  This is why you see analysts put out bullish projections for oil when it's trading at 100 and bearish predictions for oil when it's trading at 25. When Greek debt was the most attractive and yielded 35%, the ratings, agencies downgraded it. And as of December 2020 it's the least attractive. It's ever been with yields close to zero and they upgraded it.  Note that yield moves opposite to the price of the bond. So the ratings agency downgraded, the bond at the lows and upgraded it at the highs.  My points not to troll the rating agencies and I know technically, they're not forecasting. They're just now casting, the point is just that, when an asset is in trouble, everyone hates it. When an asset's ripping, everyone loves it.  And in the PDF, I also show a chart of oil and oil price forecasts. And again, you note that the price moves first and the forecast follows and has no predictive value.  Extrapolation bias does not just impact economists and forecasters it impacts Traders. Big time.  Most Traders are much more comfortable, buying things that are going up and selling things that are going down. Sometimes, this isn't appropriate strategy. Often it is not the bias manifests in another way besides the tendency to chase the market higher and lower, many Traders put on a trade. And when it hits their target, instead of taking profit, they raise their target. It looks bad, I can't take profits here. They'll say  Be aware of this bias. Notice it in your thought patterns be rational.  As my friend, the gold Crow says, it always looks great on the highs and terrible on the lows.  When there's a strong Trend and you have faith in it for multiple reasons, that's not extrapolation bias. That's a rational expectation. That the thing will go up when a stock rallies 3 bucks out of nowhere. And your instinct is to buy it because someone must know something you're making an irrational extrapolation. There are Traders out there that have the opposite bias and tend to trade mean reversion all the time. Even when things are trending, that's me. I'm More biased towards mean reversion and the bias can be just as costly as extrapolation trading mean reversion. All the time, can be like trying to catch falling pianos. Strong. Trend equals falling piano.  Do you like to catch falling pianos?  This is really important. Good Traders. Go with the trend or fade it depending on the regime, the setup, the fundamentals, the technicals, and so on, they don't identify themselves as Trend or mean revision, experts? Don't say, I'm a mean reversing guy or I'm a trend follower, different styles work at different times. You should identify and trade, what works in the current market, don't commit to 1 trading style and hope the market cooperates. It won't  Negative extrapolation.  Well, what we typically witness in financial markets is positive extrapolation. That is everyone assumes, whatever's happening will keep happening. There can also be the problem of negative Extrapolation that is it has never happened before. So it won't happen. Now this is a failure of imagination. The best Outlook is to always consider almost any possibility. No matter how unlikely.  This doesn't mean you need to position for extremely low probability outcomes, all the time. You just need to consider them.  A famous example of negative extrapolation is Ben bernanke's famous failure of imagination. Just before the 2008 Global financial crisis  Interviewer tell me, what is the worst case scenario? Sir, we have so many economists coming on our air and saying, oh this is a bubble and it's going to burst. And this is going to be a real issue for the economy. Some say, it could even cause a recession at some point. What is the worst case scenario? If, in fact, we were to see housing prices come down substantially across the country.  And Bernanke responds.  Well, I guess I don't buy your premise. It's a pretty unlikely possibility. We've never had a decline. In house prices on a nationwide basis. So what I think is more likely is that house prices will slow. May be stabilized, might slow consumption spending of it. I don't think it's going to drive the economy too far from its full employment path, though.  In case you were born very recently, housing went down nationwide in 2008 and went down a lot. People use similar logic when assessing the Swiss National Bank Euro Swiss floor at 120 before it broke. In 2015. The idea was they held it this long? There's no way they'll let it break, and it's gone.  Another concept that long seemed ridiculous and unimaginable but then quickly became mainstream is the idea of negative interest rates most market pricing before 2012 or so, always treated zero as the absolute lower Bound for interest rates.  Therefore punters made bets in Swiss rates, for example, that went horribly wrong when the Swiss National Bank cut rates below. Zero always remember anything. Can happen.  This does not mean you need to be wracked with fear on high alert for extremely low probability events. All the time, it means you need to be open-minded to outliers and their possible impact.  Consider low probability events and think about how they could influence your risk of ruin.  No matter how unlikely an event might be, it's not worth taking the other side if it can blow you up.  many learned this, the hard way, after the Swiss National Bank debacle in 2015,  Trader bias. Number 5, favorites. Versus long shots.  Human beings generally prefer to bet on long shots and avoid favorites, even though favorites almost always offer higher expected returns.  Before we delve into why that might be and how it's relevant to trading. Let's look at a bit of evidence from the world of horse racing.  Here's the money quote and an accompanying chart in the PDF from a 2010 paper. By Eric snowberg and just And woofers.  Quote.  The racetrack provides a natural laboratory for economists. Interested in understanding decision-making under uncertainty.  The most discussed empirical regularity in racetrack gambling markets, is the favorite Longshot bias, equilibrium market, prices betting odds, provide biased, estimates of the probability of a horse. Winning specifically betters value long shots, more than expected given how rarely they win and they value favorites to little given how often they win.  The figure illustrates that the rate of return to betting on horses with odds of 101 or greater is about -61 betting randomly yields averaged returns of minus 23%. While betting the favorite in every race yields losses of only 5.5%,  So betting on favorites is clearly a less bad strategy than betting on Long Shots yet. Even though the effect is well known, it's persisted over many decades Favorite long shop bias was initially discussed in 1949, and yet the effect still shows up in many but not all gambling and financial markets.  The more asymmetric and Lotto like the payout, the more likely Traders investors gamblers and regular folk will over BET The Longshots.  There are 3 main reasons for the existence of favorite Longshot bias.  1 the marginal utility of a large win is often higher than the marginal utility of a small win. Even if the odds of the small win are near 100% with a fixed amount of Capital At Risk, small payoffs, don't really move the needle, financially, or psychologically.  Say, you're a hedge fund manager who wants to generate a 10% return this year.  You're offered 2 trades. Both risking 5 basis points. If wrong.  Trade 1 has an 80% chance of making 5 basis points. So the expected value is plus 3, and trade 2 has a 5% chance of making 80 basis points, expected value of negative. Of 0.75.  Even though trade 1 is clearly more attractive, mathematically many Traders, whether they will admit it or not are more attracted to trade 2 because it moves the needle for their year-to-date p&l if it hits. Well, the first 1 does not unless they make a huge bet.  2 bettinger  And 3 human beings tend to overestimate the likelyhood of lower probability of events and underestimate those with higher probability.  Keep this in mind when assessing odds, if you think something's a 5% shot, you're probably too high. If you think something's an 85% shot, you're probably too low in contrast. Humans are good at evaluating probabilities in the middle of the Spectrum in the 25% to 60% Zone.  Since estimating probability is a critical skill in trading. You must understand, it is more More difficult to estimate high and low probabilities than those near the middle.  In trading the long shot bias. Effect shows up in language like levered bets or outstanding risk reward and the ever popular asymmetric payout profile.  Looking for asymmetric payouts, makes sense in aggregate. If you're always betting, a dollar to win 50 cents in a game where the odds are not known beforehand. Only estimated it's hard to achieve persistent success. On the other hand this preference for long shots can sometimes lead to bad trades with good updates.  The Longshot mentality is bolstered by Financial media features. That shower adulation on tail Risk Managers in the rare moments. They're highly levered Insurance bets pay off.  There are no stories written about the tail risk fund that bleeds for 4 straight years. While the vix is pinned at 12, the takeaway here is be aware of favorite Longshot bias, don't get sucked in, by bad trades with good Optics.  An example. Favorite long shot bias in action.  You often see favorite long shot bias over economic and Central Bank events. For example, when a central bank meeting is coming up and there's a tiny but not zero chance of that Central Bank, cutting rates, the market loves to go into the meeting short, the currency this often creates an imbalance where there are so many people betting on the long shot, a rate cut that you get an outsized move when no cut is delivered.  Here's an example in early February 2020 Co 19 was popping up all over the world and had triggered the first wave of fear about the global economy given Australia's dependence on Commodities and Global growth. Some observers thought the Reserve Bank of Australia might cut rates in response to the virus Contagion.  Interest rate, markets price, the probability of an interest rate, cut at less than 10%, but if the cut was delivered, Aussie dollar might drop 100 points.  the simple Longshot trade was to go short Aussie and cover quickly if the RBA did not Announcer rate, cut.  Traders in this setup. Thought they were risking a few Pips for a chance to make a 100 Pips of profit.  But in the PDF, I show a chart of what happened and the RBA left rates unchanged and Aussie spiked much more than expected.  There were so many Traders, caught short on the lotto ticket trade, the pair Gap, 30 Pips higher from 66.90 to 6720.  Traders thought they were risking 5 Pips to make a 100 but they were actually risking 30 to make a 100  So if you assigned a 10% chance to the RBA cut, which was probably generous the expected value of the trade, with 5 Pips of downside was plus 5.5, but in real life, because the know cut cost you 30 points. The expected value of the trade was actually minus 17 Pips and there's a table in the PDF that explains all that math note that while we didn't know for sure because it didn't happen, a cut from the RBA, might have yielded a drop of less than 100 points because the position was so Started. In other words, the expected value of the trade might have even been worse than minus 17 basis points.  Anytime you hear people talking about a lotto ticket trade or a trade, where there's very little risk or where you win, in almost every scenario be cautious. This is probably a sign that Traders are flocking to a trade that has great Optics on paper, but possibly bad mathematics in real life. Those trades get crowded as a trade, gets crowded, the risk reward gets worse and your ability to get out. Quickly becomes impaired.  Favorite long shot bias also shows up in option. Pricing, speculators love to buy low. Delta options, that is cheap options that pay out a huge windfall, if something very unlikely happens  And market makers generally do not like selling them. Therefore research shows that the lower the probability of an option paying off and thus the more leverage is embedded in that option. The more overpriced it will tend to be  Watch for favorite Longshot, bias in your own trading and in setups that. Unfold in front of you.  Chapter 7 continued.  Trader bias. Number 6, round numbers.  When you fill up your car with gas? Do you sometimes have the urge to round it off to the nearest Dollar? Even though you're paying with a credit card?  Do you get a tiny thrill watching? A car's odometer. Roll over from 99999 to 100,000.  For many amateur. Marathon runners a finishing time of 3 hours, 59 minutes and 58 seconds is a great success. Well, 4 hours and 2 seconds is a disappointment. These are examples of round number bias, human beings tend to pay attention to round numbers and treat them as special or more important than other numbers.  Okay sure, Brent. But who cares?  You should.  round number bias, appears in financial markets, and while the knowledge will not be Life or career changing for you, it will save you from the occasional big disappointment.  Due to round number bias, many Market, participants leave their orders on the round numbers. Many more than you would see if orders were randomly or evenly distributed.  In the PDF are 2 examples from the world of equities, but these anomalies are present in every Market. I've studied  The 2 charts show the distribution of the last 2, digits, the sense of each daily high and low in Tesla and Netflix from 2015 to 2020.  For example, 52040 would be 40. 765, exactly, would be 000 509.33 would be 33, Etc.  And in the charts, you can see a huge over representation of highs and lows at 0000 and 50. Exactly. As round number bias would predict  therefore, if you leave an order to buy at say 400, 731 your statistically more likely to get filled than the person with an order at 4 7 3. 9 9.  Most days, you'll probably get filled at any 1 of those 3 levels.  But the occasional time you get filled at 01, when you would not have got filled once at lower can have a big impact on your performance.  On the flip side. If you're leaving, stop loss, orders, always leave them on the correct side of the round number. Sell stops should be below, 000 and buy stops, should be above the day. You leave a stop at 474.99 and the low is 475. Exactly, you'll feel like you got lucky but these tiny alterations in Behavior can sometimes be skill masquerading as good luck.  And when that happens, you owe me a beer.  Trader bias. Number 7, epifania. Quote chaos is not dangerous until it begins to look orderly end quote. Max Gunther the Zurich axioms.  Great Traders are masters of pattern recognition. They'll see a setup and recognize it either consciously or unconsciously? I remember many times after great runs of trading that I felt like I knew what was going to happen before it happened. The ability comes from the incredible powers of human pattern recognition.  Problem is humans are built to see patterns even when none exists.  apophenia or patternicity are terms psychologists use to describe the human predisposition to see patterns or connections, even where none exists  epifania leads to many flaws in human thinking and explains why people see Jesus on toast, UFOs in the sky Bigfoot in the woods. And so on the human bias toward pattern, recognition also leads gamblers, who are on a winning streak to believe they will keep winning even Smart logical. People often feel like they're heating up after a lucky series of hands at a poker table.  This is also known as clustering illusion. People have a hard time believing that streaks are the result of Randomness even though random data contains many streaks,  We're wired to find meaning and significance in random and meaningless data.  Apophenia goes a long way toward explaining, why humans believe conspiracy, theories, suffer from paranoia and embrace pseudo science. When you see patterns everywhere, you see me meaning and connections too.  Understand that you are not immune, you are predisposed to see patterns, even where none exist.  The human ability to see patterns is a critical part of our Evolution and allows us to understand the world without having to analyze every single new piece of information.  If we've never seen a large black cat with large teeth on the Savannah, a useful evolutionary trait was to assume that Its Behavior and risk profile is similar. To other large animals with huge teeth, we've encountered in the past.  We can correctly infer that the presence of dark clouds in the sky above us represents an increased probability of rain in the next few hours. We know, hissing sound. Nearby means snake bite risk is higher than normal and we dramatically increase our alert level.  Evolution favored false positives, over false negatives because the cost of a false positive, in the wild was much lower than a false negative for example.  There's a loud grumbling noise in the bush caveman core cannot clearly identify it.  False positive type 1 error. Hmm. That sounded like a lion. I think I'm out of here.  Cost grow may have used some unnecessary energy, avoiding what could have been just a random sound?  Or false negative type 2 error.  Hmm. I wonder what that grumbly noise was? Didn't sound exactly like a lion? I guess. I'm good.  42 seconds later. Oh shit, it was a lot.  Cost C is dead.  Seeing patterns where there are? None may be superior evolutionary Behavior, but it's not helpful in trading given the very strong human instinct to see patterns how useful do you think simple eyeballing of charts basic trend lines and breakout patterns is likely to be what are the odds that chart break is just a standard false positive? Like the loud noise in the bush. Now add on human confirmation bias. Are you just seeing what you want to see? Probably  This does not mean, there are no patterns in the world. If you run into heavy traffic, 4 days in a row, at a pretty clear intersection. It makes sense to consider. Whether there's causation investigating further or temporarily changing your route is likely to be up optimal.  But you need to be aware. That the way humans see patterns is biased to type 1 errors. You need to be discriminating and use a tight filter. When looking for patterns, you need to consider that what you are looking at could be right. Random.  How to combat apophenia.  There are 3 ways to beat apophenia in trading awareness, skepticism and Analysis.  1 awareness.  Hopefully this section has you thinking about and more aware of apophenia and patternicity. It's a deeply ingrained and basic part of human cognitive function, once you appreciate that, the human brain is biased toward pattern, recognition, new patterns, you detect are placed in the proper context.  2.  Start from a place of skepticism, when you see a pattern or a correlation assume, it's bogus and try to work out why that might be wrong, most people assume patterns are valid. And then spend time further validating them with other analysis, or information, you should start by assuming patterns are meaningless and work your way towards meaning via analysis.  And that's 3 analysis. Let's say you see a headline on Bloomberg, death cross in silver. Futures triggers bear. Signal you, pull up the story and see a fugly chart where the 50-day moving average has just crossed below. The 200-day, is your first instinct to sell silver or to investigate more deeply patterns? Like, this should not be taken at face value. Most of them are meaningless and have no empirical basis, take half an hour to pull some data into Excel and back test the pattern.  Does it have any predictive value?  Now, when I say patterns that does not just mean technical analysis, it's any cause and effect relationship that appears to exist in markets. Again, humans tend to ascribe causality to many things that are the result of pure chance.  On the other hand patterns, like the following examples could be meaningful persistent and predictive.  Gold tends to go lower from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. maybe gold producers sell at this time.  Whenever us rates, go lower Delian goes lower Japanese investors prefer higher rates.  Apple tends to lead qqqq. large caps lead, indexes, and so on sophisticated pattern recognition can be a significant source of edge when it's free from bias,  I spend a good part of my time analyzing data in an attempt to determine whether patterns have predictive value or not.  Most often the answer is not.  Taking the time to analyze patterns and to determine whether or not they're useful for forecasting is a good way to overcome epifania and discover useful tools for beating the market.  This is my simple Force step method for accepting or rejecting patterns.  1 identify a pattern or relationship.  2 generate a hypothesis. The best patterns have some sort of, underlying logic. If gold goes down every day from 9 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. maybe that's the window. When gold producers sell, if you can logically explain why a pattern works, it's much more likely to be non-random and persistent.  3, analyze the data 4 except, or dismiss the Pattern.  Anyone who took a science class as a kid should recognize this. As a short form version of the scientific method, most patterns, you analyze will be worthless, you'll dismiss them and move on. On the other hand, the few patterns you find that are, non-random, can be incredibly valuable to your future Trading.  Every time you notice a pattern reduce it to something, you can test and then get to work, you don't need sophisticated quantitative skills to do basic back testing of simple theories.  Once you back test a pattern, you have a much deeper understanding of whether or not it's random and, you know, whether to factor it into your trading decisions.  For example, I like to use moves in 1 market, to predict moves in another Market.  Here's an example of how I'll look at a pattern and try to determine whether or not it has meaning  this excerpt from AMX. Also gives you an idea of how I pulled together, multiple reasons for a particular trade idea. We will discuss how to build a trade idea in much more depth later on.  From July 1, 2020.  We had a rare setup at the close yesterday as us rates have dropped 8 basis points in the last 5 days. While dollar Yen was up 1.3%.  There have been 2,610 trading days in the last 10 years, and just 49 of them, have satisfied, the condition.  Delian up more than 1% and US ten year yields down more than 7 base points. Here's how Delaware and performed after  And in the PDF, there's a table that shows that Dianne performed very poorly under these conditions.  And note that DeLorean rallied from 888 to 107 in the last 10 years. So if you took any random sample, it would show DeLorean going up, not down.  That makes the result even more interesting.  The medians are similar to The averages. So there's not a small group of instances skewing the average. Overall, I think dollar yen is a sell based on yields the move in gold and delorean's, consistent inability to take out 108.000.  Also, there was a 3-day run of buying Madness in New York time from 7 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. and there's no evidence of that today. It was probably a major rebalance into month end, so that is over which also helps  Note in the chart below how dollar Yen bashed against 108 4 times before a huge fall break and then it retested the 108 level again afterwards and failed.  I am therefore adding a short dollar Yen. Recommendation, you could either sell here or leave an offer at 107.75 with a stop loss at 1 0 8. 2 6.  And with yield curve control on the horizon and the explosion of Corona virus cases in the US, South, I doubt strong us data will impact yields very much.  That's the end of The excerpt and now back to the normal part of the book.  Note by leaving an order to sell above Market at 1 0 7. 7 5,  I attempt to take advantage of the noisy volatility created by an event. I think is meaningless to get set at a good level on a trade a like for a bunch of reasons.  And in the PDF, there's a chart and it shows, I went short at 107.75 and that was pretty close to the high. I got set on the trade the day after payrolls, and went pretty much straight down.  Back testing is an entire field of quantitative research and there's considerable complexity involved. I'm not a computational finance or applied math expert. So I like to keep things as simple as possible.  I come up with a theory that I test it. I don't tweak the parameters or Snoop around till I find something useful. I just go in test and get out.  While a full course on back testing is beyond the scope of this audio book. You don't need a degree in financial engineering to conduct basic fact, tests of patterns, you identify and ideas. You come up with  when testing your hypothesis, be aware of a few things 1, the law of small numbers,  You need a decent sample of observations, for your analysis, to mean anything. If you see that Tesla stock went down the last 4, aprils, in a row, that's meaningless. If it went down, 33 of the last 41, Fridays, that might mean something.  Well, there's no hard rule for legit sample size, any study, using less than 30 observations is risky and likely to be unreliable.  2, the harder you have to look the more likely, whatever you find is bogus or biased.  Let's say you want to see how the stock market performs the Monday after a 3% drop on Friday you find nothing. Interesting. So then you test how it performs after a 4% drop on Friday, still nothing.  Then you up the threshold to 5% and find the subsequent Monday. A Is a 2% fall.  Then you test what if stocks fall 2% or more Thursday and 5% or more on Friday?  The more you mess around with your parameters, the more likely you are to find quote, interesting results. This is called P hacking in the research business, you keep tweaking the inputs till you get an interesting result. That is not good research.  Don't torture your data in an effort to make it confess. Keep your analysis simple.  For the best ever. And super simple explanation of how P hacking snooping and data mining work. Google XKCD green jellybeans,  3.  Be aware of the trend in your data.  If you do any study of the S&P 500 data, since 1930, you will generally find that bullish strategies perform well and bearish strategies perform poorly.  This makes sense since stocks, have gone up a zillion percent in that time period. Similarly, you will find it easy to discover Coalition, NASDAQ or bearish oil company strategies. The secular Trend in the data is an important driver of the output of any strategy. You analyze.  4.  No matter how well, something worked in the past, there's no guarantee it will work in the future in a world of infinite data. Many relationships and a huge number of sophisticated analysts people are going to find strategies that worked in the past. If you have a strong opinion on, why the strategy is likely to work in the future, the value of your analysis is higher, for example, turn around Tuesday, which is discussed in more details. Soon is well, known and has existed for many years. It's founded on a reliable and repeatable pattern of human behavior and a persistent fear and greed cycle that repeats around weekends. Even if statistically Savvy investors know about it.  Also, as a short-term strategy, it's fairly expensive to execute in terms of transaction costs. So large institutions are unlikely to quickly arbit. Budget away.  And 5 don't build regression models. Unless you know what you're doing. Regression models can be useful but often require sophisticated knowledge to avoid Data, Mining overfitting and other errors. Most patterns in finance are random. You need to find evidence and use logic before accepting a pattern as meaningful.  As a quick detour, here's a bit more info on turnaround, Tuesday, in case you're not familiar with its amazing power.  Turnaround Tuesday.  During periods of Market fear, there is a common intake pattern that stock markets. Often follow markets, don't always follow this pattern, but they follow it, a surprising proportion of the time.  Thursday. Hmm, I'm getting a bit nervous here. Maybe I should reduce a bit of my stock market, exposure. Friday morning. I need to hedge. This looks really bad Friday afternoon better. Sell some S&P features. To hedge my weekend risk. Wow, what a brutal close Saturday. Everyone reads the alarming media. Of the scary things that knock the market down Friday.  Sunday, Asia and Monday morning markets Gap, open lower and selling builds as Asia, selling Cascades into Europe, New York Traders, press their shorts, Monday around 4 pm, the low Tuesday turnaround Tuesday as shorts. Get squeezed, Wednesday seesaw. Battle between bulls and bears and Thursday. Hmm, I'm getting a bit nervous here. Maybe I should reduce a bit of my stock market exposure.  The most reliable part of this pattern is turnaround, Tuesday. This is the tendency for stocks to rip higher on Tuesday. If they sold off the Friday and Monday before, it's a simple human pattern that occurs because when the news appears bad Traders, get nervous into the weekend and sell some of their Holdings on Friday.  Then they read all kinds of negative media reports about the big scary thing, and that scares them into selling more on Monday.  Investors selling pulls in momentum traders, who go short on Monday? This adds to the selling pressure Then Tuesday comes and there's nobody left to sell.  Then the shorts, get squeezed and that triggers turnaround Tuesday.  In case you think the sound silly, have a look at the evidence?  In the PDF, there's a table showing how the S&P performs in the most extreme turnaround Tuesday setup which is when it falls, Thursday and Friday, and then is down more than 5% on Monday. This is rare, but check out the returns and I'm going to read them very quickly. There's 9 of them and it's an average return of 3.3%, and the returns are minus 4, plus 3, plus 5, plus 5, plus 2, plus 5, plus 4, plus 5, plus 5. So a lot of big Returns on the Tuesday.  In contrast, if you study all days after a 5% 1 day, drop the average return. The next day is just plus 0.9%, not terrible, but nothing amazing.  Second to give you more evidence supporting turnaround Tuesday. There's another chart that shows S&P performance for Tuesday. Day versus all other days in 2008. 2008 was 1 of the worst bare markets in history. So, turnaround Tuesday was a thing, almost all year.  And the chart shows that if you are long on Tuesday during 2008, you actually made money even though stocks fell more than 50%, that is a completely insane statistic.  Trader bias. Number 8, anchoring. I've always found anchoring bias to be 1 of the most interesting forms of Trader bias. The basic idea of anchoring bias is that when we are asked to guess or predict something we're biased toward the first reference point offered  Outside of Finance. This is most commonly seen in negotiation. If we're told the price of a car is 12,000, anything below that feels cheap and anything above feels expensive. Even if we find out later that the car is only worth 10,000. Will still find ourselves anchored, on the initial price heaps of Search proves this, weirdly anchoring works even if the initial number is unrelated to the question at hand.  A simple anchoring experiment which my son did for science. Fair once and it worked goes as follows subjects. First draw a random number from 1 to 100 out of a bag. Then they're asked to guess, for example,  How many African countries are in the United Nations?  Those that Drew low numbers from the bag answer consistently lower than those who drew higher numbers out of the bag.  Another famous example of anchoring is when you ask people to quickly estimate 1 * 2, * 3, * 4, * 5, * 6, * 7 * 8. You get a much lower answer than if you asked them to quickly estimate. 8, * 7, * 6, * 5 * 4, * 3, * 2 * 1.  In negotiation, you often hear never make the first offer because you're giving up too much information and optionality.  in contrast and effective, negotiation strategy can be for 1 side to make an Outrageous, first offer there by anchoring the negotiation on a figure that's hard to get away from say, your negotiating with an employer, you want to get paid thousand dollars a year and you believe you have decent power in the negotiation.  You open by suggesting a salary of 650,000. Now, both sides are anchored. So high that, when you finally settle on 550,000, everyone feels like a winner.  Once you know about anchoring, you see it all over the place, especially in how companies price their goods treadmill was 1,299. Now 9.99,  That sounds like a good deal but it could well be. The company has never sold a single unit for 1,299 and they're just trying to Anchor. You on that inflated price to make you feel good about paying 9.99.  In markets anchoring bias, manifests in 4 main ways.  1, we anchor on our entry point.  This is the most common and Powerful way you see anchoring by In markets, if you buy a stock at $99.40, that specific level becomes very powerful in your mind, you'll find it. Much easier for example to sell at 99.41 small profit than 99.39 a small loss, even though the economics of selling at these 2, different levels is practically identical.  Losing is painful and negative winning is pleasurable and positive. So even though, 2 senses, meaningless to your pnl, the difference between selling below, or above your cost, is the difference between winning and losing,  Human beings are hardwired to avoid losses as discussed earlier. Research shows the pain, we feel from losses is about double the pleasure we get from gains of equal size. This bias is called loss aversion.  A related bias is the disposition effect. This is the strong and consistent tendency for investors to prefer to sell assets that have increased in value. While holding on to assets that show a  If it goes up, you sell it. If it goes down, you hold on to it and pray for a bounce.  These related forms of bias all come down to the same thing. Humans don't like to lose. The remedy is simple. You must learn to love small losses.  When you take a small loss, try to feel good about it, say taking small losses is the way to achieve trading success. Say it over and over taking small losses, is the way to achieve trading, success taking small losses is the way to achieve trading, success, taking small losses is the way to achieve trading success.  Trading losses are an expense incurred by your trading business. Your goal is to minimize trading loss expense while maximizing trading Revenue. You minimize trading loss expense by cutting bad trades quickly and by sticking to your plan, you increase trading loss expense with shoddy risk management, poor discipline and sloppy Trading.  as a beginning Trader, you will no doubt hear your Yourself thinking this trade feels wrong as soon as I get to break, even I'm out.  2 problems here. Problem 1. This trade feels wrong, is not rational unpack. Why it feels wrong? Is there something inherently wrong with the price action? Or is the stock just not moving and you're bored? Those are 2 completely different things. Often your instincts are just your impatience and emotions trying to sabotage a perfectly good trade.  Problem 2. As soon as I get to break, even I'm out is not logical. Do you think the market cares where you got in as if there's something magical about your entry point, if you've determined biologic that the trade is not worth holding on to get out. If you've not determined you should get out of the trade, maintain your existing parameters.  Every trade you put on should have a stop loss and a take profit after that. You need a solid reason to cut the trade. Otherwise stick to your original plan. Don't keep recalibrating based on every emotion. You feel motions are fine. But overreacting to them is not.  Just remember your entry point is meaningless.  2. We tend to anchor on price level highs and lows. The feeling you get from the market is often more about recent changes, not absolute moves. This is why if you buy gold at 1570 and it goes to 1670, you feel good. But then when it drops to 1600, you feel more bad than good even though you're still $30 in the money.  How we feel about a trade is often more influenced by recent changes in price than by aggregate moves.  Say, your long gold with a stop at 1540 and I take profit at 1680. It rallies to 16770, then pulls back to 1620.  Quite often a Trader will say if it just gets back to 16770, I'll get out.  They are anchoring on the high because that was their moment of Maximum pleasure. Sure, if 1670 is a major tech level now, and you realize 1680 was the wrong level to take profit, be my guest and move your tail. Profit lower but don't just move it because you're anchored on that level now.  3.  We also anchor on p&l highs, have you ever been up 15,000 at midday then you give back half and you say, okay? If I just get back to 15,000 I'll square up. That's not rational when you hear your internal monologue saying, something like this recognize that, you're not being rational trade, the current setup, not the arbitrary. Pnl threshold, you hit 2 hours ago  1 of the key overall lessons. I hope you get from this book. Is this recognize when you are thinking or behaving irrationally and stop it,  even after 25 years of trading, I still think and say irrational things on the trading floor.  The biggest difference now is that I hear myself saying these things and quietly laugh at myself, the ability to Get outside yourself and see when you are not being, rational is a necessary step towards becoming an alpha Trader.  4.  Economists, anchor on prior. Economic data, if the non-farm payrolls number NFP was plus 325,000 last month and all signs point to a much lower. Number this month, research shows that economists will tend to anchor on the prior number and their forecasts on average will be too high.  Say you're an economist and you're extremely detailed and complex. Econometric model says that this month NFP should be 38,000 if last month was 325,000 that 38,000 number feels kind of low.  You'll be inclined to submit a number. That sounds a bit less extreme or more irrational in quotes like plus 100,000. In fact that number is less rational and is influenced by anchoring bias.  if you trade the economic data look for moments, when this month's data is expected to be significantly different from last month's, then assume the actual outcome will show an even larger discrepancy than economists forecast, suggests  if you're interested in the specific topic, Of how economists. Anchor check out Campbell and Sharp's paper. Here's a quick excerpt.  We examine whether expert, consensus forecasts a monthly economic releases from 1990 to 2006, have a tendency to be systematically biased, toward the value of previous months, data releases. We find broad-based and significant evidence for the anchoring hypothesis. Consensus forecasts are biased towards the values of previous months data, releases, which in some cases results in sizable, predictable forecast, errors.  Trader bias. Number 9 hurting.  1 great. Paradox of markets is that they are mostly driven by the wisdom of the crowd but occasionally by its Madness separating. The 2 is a key source of alpha before we talk about hurting and temporary Madness in markets. Let's first discuss the wisdom of crowds.  Most of the time the errors made by buyers and sellers cancel out. And the average of all the transactions is some approximation of a reasonable equilibrium price. This outcome is similar to the jelly bean experiment in that experiment. A crowd of people are asked to guess how many jelly beans are in a jar. The interesting result is that the crowd the average of all the guesses is always very accurate and often more accurate than any individual in the entire crowd.  This is astounding and suggests. You should be humble when trying to beat the market.  Instead of a bunch of undergrads guessing. How many jelly beans are in the jar. Imagine a thousand. Highly trained quants who have millions of dollars to invest in Jellybean estimation technology. Do you think you can beat them? That's a more apt analogy for the markets. The wisdom of crowds, though, relies on diverse, and unbiased opinion and it relies on incentives. If there's no prize, estimates will be lazy, and less accurate.  or for example, if the jar is extremely far away from the people trying to estimate the number, Of jelly beans say at the very front of a huge lecture hall. The crowdsourced conclusion might be too low because the jar looks smaller from afar. If everyone is drunk or distracted, the estimate also might not be as good.  In trading. If you can explain exactly why you think the crowd is wrong. You're on the right track. Usually this would be other because the crowd is biased or the crowd's. Incentives are not aligned with the goal of finding the equilibrium price. I'll explain both in the section that follows the main. Takeaway for this section is  Assumed the crowd is wise most of the time and look for moments. When you can explain exactly why it is wrong or identify that it has gone mad.  As the amount of quality data available to all investors approaches Infinity, it is more and more difficult to find an informational Edge before 2000 or so. Economic and financial Market data were expensive and difficult to acquire for non-institutional investors as recently as 2000. 06 or 2007, a Trader with live price feeds and a solid understanding of correlation had an informational Edge over other short-term Traders.  Live news, feeds were expensive and Out Of Reach for individual investors until recently.  Now literally anyone can access reams of financial data, read dozens of well-informed blogs doing sophisticated cross market analysis, and get free, real-time news from Twitter and other sources.  Informational Edge is incredibly difficult to find this puts a premium on other types of market analysis. And I believe, potentially increases the value of sentiment, and positioning analysis.  By their nature, markets are prone to periods of hurting narrative, driven markets with many Traders, chasing the same themes and responding to the exact same information. And incentives, can drive everyone toward the same cliff.  If you can identify the times when the entire Market is running in the same direction, you can pick It and profit by going the other way. There are multiple reasons Market participants heard to the same themes and trends  1 hering is human nature. In chapter 5, we talked about the asch Conformity experiments where even when it was obvious that a line was the same size as the other lines. Many subjects would go with the crowd. If the majority said 1 line was longer.  Ash did another famous experiment to show how human beings prefer to conform with their peers.  The experiment involved, multiple actors who enter an elevator and face the back of the elevator away from the door.  Ash found that most random strangers who entered the elevator afterwards. Join the crowd and faced away from the door Conformity and hurting our basic human instincts, that help Society function. If you see a group of people acting a certain way, it sends you a strong subconscious signal, that the group behavior is appropriate and so it requires strong conscience, push back for you to act independently.  2, it's much easier. To believe in and respond to a narrative than it is to Value securities.  The internet's going to be huge. You got to buy. Cisco is an easier story to understand than Cisco is overvalued at 100 times sales.  Since human Traders are more stimulated by stories than they are by data. The price level of an asset is often less important than the story. Being told, this is why good companies can be terrible Investments.  While there's usually great uncertainty surrounding the appropriate value of a company's stock. There's frequently little disagreement over good stories.  Amazon is a revolutionary company that offers an unprecedented. Customer experience is hard to debate and easy to invest. In since most people are trading narratives, whether they want to admit it or not and narratives are often pretty clear and 1 sided investors heard into the great stories, this is not just true with stocks. It's true with macroeconomic stories, too.  Number 3, fomo. Period when aonics and Bank of Japan easing were driving dollar Yen higher portfolio. Managers knew their peers were killing it on the trade. So even later on, when dollar Yen, had already gone from 80 to 120 Traders, had to have it because they felt stupid. If they did not,  Before the boj meetings in 2015 and 2016 I often heard hedge fund PM, say something like. Well I don't think the boj is going to do anything tonight, but I'm going in Long Dollar, Yan anyway, just in case.  This is fomo and favorite long shop bias, all wrapped into 1 negative EV trade idea.  PMS were thinking more about the lotto ticket style payoff and how they might look bad for. Missing it. Instead of rationally sizing up, the risk reward of playing for a low probability event that was already heavily subscribed.  4 as a rule, human beings are not very original. And this is true both inside and outside the investment industry.  This is why independent thinkers are. So Highly valued in investment firms. There are not very many of them.  Many Traders on Wall Street, are extremely book, smart gifted test takers that made their way into trading by playing the ivy league game to Perfection, get straight A's crush the SATs, play a sport Network like crazy and voila. None of this requires much independent thinking.  This is not to say Wall Street is a particularly unoriginal environment. It's just to say that on average most people follow the crowd and Wall Street is no exception.  Original creative thinking can be a huge source of edge in trading. If all you see is the same stuff everyone else sees, how can you find, inefficiencies, how can you profit? You probably can't.  You follow the crowds stick to Benchmark and hope nobody finds you out.  5 incentive.  Many Traders and investors are incentivized to stick with the crowd.  As an investment manager, if you hug your benchmark and own, mostly technology, stocks during a Tec bull market. You're unlikely to get fired on the other hand. If you think Tech is overvalued and you, stay underweight through the bull market, you are very likely to get fired. If tech crashes and you're long with everyone else. Your investors are likely to give you a pass.  Everyone else got killed in that crash too, man. Nobody could have seen it coming.  Traders and investors who have mortgages and kids and private school often think more about keeping their jobs than they do about maximizing profits.  Let's go back to the Jelly Bean game again for a minute. Imagine a game where 400 students are asked to guess how many jelly beans are in a jar. But the 5 high, highest and 5, lowest guesses are expelled from school and the rest compete for a prize of $50. How would that change the distribution of the guesses?  My bet is that particular set of incentives would heard everyone toward the average and greatly reduce the number of extreme guesses.  Hurting does not just happen in investing, it's a feature of trading too. Let's say you're a Trader at a macro hedge fund and there's a huge macro theme. For example, the ECB is doing quantitative easing, most people in the business are doing the trade. In fact, you went to a macro Roundtable dinner at Milo's last week and 12 out of 15 Traders said long Italian. Bonds was their top trade thing is you don't like Italian bonds, you think their price for Perfection then again, you know, if Italian bonds rip and all your peers deliver returns of 10% plus while you drop 3%. It's going to look bad. Your wife just delivered your second child and you just upsized to a 5,700 square foot. Mcmansion in Westchester.  Maybe it'd be better to just plug your nose and buy the stinking Italian bonds. If the bonds crash you and all your peers and the year down and investors be like, what are you going to do bad year for macro?  Quite often hurting is caused by career risk. It often feels riskier for a Trader to go against the herd than it is for him to just follow along. Doing the opposite of what everyone else is doing, is hard, it goes directly against human nature. Most people react, strongly, to incentives. And so instead of solving for how can I make my investors? The most money they solve for what will give me the best chance of keeping my job. Even if they're not doing this consciously there's a good chance. Their subconscious is busy. Doing it for them.  To recap wisdom of the crowds works when the crowd is diverse unbiased and motivated by aligned incentives. When you see a market where these conditions are not met, start to think about going the other way,  Hurting is a tricky concept because being part of the herd is often profitable. In fact, the reflexive contrarian will lose more money than the Sheep, because major Trends get very crowded for a long time before they blow up.  Don't be the traitor. That's always trying to be smarter than everyone else. And who's always going the other way. There's a time and a place to be contrarian, Alpha Traders ident, Identify the time and place to be contrarian but are also perfectly comfortable. Riding with the herd going with the trend much of the time.  How to detect and combat hurting.  1, Embrace independent thinking humans are built to conform fight. This Instinct make confident independent judgments while staying humble at the same time. This is not easy.  2, get comfortable with feeling uncomfortable. Humans are social animals that find comfort from doing what others do and success in trading. Requires you to go against that? Instinct somewhat regularly. So successful Traders are going to feel uncomfortable. A fair amount of the time, get used to feeling uncomfortable.  3, study and quantify sentiment sentiment data is widely available and comes in all shapes and sizes will tuck sentiment in chapter 10, whatever asset you trade investigate, the best ways to collect and analyze sentiment data.  While it's great. To listen to the market noise, and try to come up with your own view on sentiment data. Usually beats, anecdote, this is especially true in our current world where people on Twitter are constantly calling for the end of the world and Bitcoin to 1 million and so on.  Data is much more useful than randomly collected Snippets.  4 use overbought and oversold indicators. My experience with overbought and oversold indicators is that your threshold for putting on trades, should be as Extreme as possible. I like signals that come up a few times per year, such as daily sentiment index below, 10, or above 90. The reason is that sentiment is not extreme. Most of the time sentiment that is rather bullish or kind of bearish means nothing. The market will spend most of its time in the space where sentiment has no predictive value.  In fact, sentiment is a go with most of the time. The only time it's contrarian is that the mega extremes, but if you can identify these I get extremes. You can hit some huge winners.  5 always be on high alert for turns and sentiment. If you ever notice bullish sentiment at the low or bearish sentiment, at the high pay attention, generally sentiment almost always follows price.  If something's going up, people will be bullish. If prices falling, most people will be bearish, there are exceptions. Many are always Bears the stock market even when it's at the highs. But in general that's how sentiment works. Very rarely though you will see the opposite and those moments are meaningful. A prime example is the US dollar in March 2020. The co 19 pandemic triggered a liquidity crisis and there was a mad Scramble for dollars. The great dollar shortage drove euro dollar from 1113 to 108 in very short order that is stronger dollar weaker Euro.  Then the FED went all in announcing a massive QE and dollar liquidity program due to ongoing pressures in emerging. markets and equities though, the dollar remained in demand,  At that time, you could see a subtle but important change in sentiment happening.  The market which had been raging bullish, dollar started to think about the future impact of all this new dollar liquidity and sentiment slowly turned from bullish dollar to modestly bearish dollar. But the dollar was still at the ding-dong highs. This is a rare but extremely high expected value set up. If you notice a subtle shift away from a popular narrative, but the price hasn't moved yet, get ready to go. The other way often price will lag sentiment a market that's bullish on the lows or bearish. On the highs is getting ready to turn.  6 State objective.  Understand the bias of the media. You consume and look for unbiased sources of data.  Twitter liens bare stocks and bullish Bitcoin and bullish gold CNBC is almost always bullish, stocks. Zero Hedge is very bearish Wall Street. And bullish gold, whatever you read, always consider which way it leans.  I prefer to read analysts who are flexible because those who constantly stick to the same view, tend to be locked in and plagued by confirmation bias.  1 of the best financial Market Guru business models is to pick a view. Hopefully a popular 1 and pound the table on it year after year, you attract a following of like-minded people and you deliver the echo chamber that they need to reinforce their views and they will pay you for it.  This is not analysis or forecasting, its marketing. Be aware when you receive information from people like this, they will never change their View. And as such their view is probably not worth much.  Good analysts will change their View at least. Once every few years, good marketers will stick to 1 View and beat it until they have paid off the summer house in East Hampton.  Don't go on Twitter and see, 400 Bears, stock market posts and conclude the market is short. It might be Might not be.  Collecting anecdotal information, can be extremely useful, but you need to know the bias of the source.  Data is almost always better than anecdotes. So, look for objective sources of sentiment and positioning data, and focus more on those than what you consumed via traditional or New Media.  Be rational and be flexible.  Before we wrap up this section on Trader bias, let me give you a few blurbs on other important forms of bias to watch out for.  Outcome by us. This is our tendency to evaluate a decision based on the outcome and the process that was followed to reach that decision.  I discussed process versus outcome in chapter 5 and it's extremely important to separate the 2.  If you do a ton of research, come up with a great trade idea and then a totally random news event stops, you out 10 minutes after you put on the trade. That's good to decision. Bad outcome, don't worry about it.  Any Duke's book thinking in bets? Spends a ton of time on outcome bias. She calls it. Resulting, it's a great book if you want to learn more about thinking about thinking,  Squirrel. Chasing bias.  Human attention is drawn to shiny objects Homer. Simpson is often distracted by squirrels  prices on the screen are stimulating and interesting and human beings tend to confirm much more meaning to price movement than it generally deserves  Chasing bias is the tendency to enter trades in a security simply because it's moving.  Something rallies and you want to buy it, something sells off, you want to sell it, rid yourself of this bias, it's a weakness that plagues many Traders even hedge fund professionals.  It is essentially a combination of activity bias, The Need to Be Active, even when doing nothing would be a better choice and extrapolation bias, it went down, so it's going to keep going down.  Bad Traders. See price moving on the screen and think somebody knows something good. Traders know, 97% of all price action is noise.  Apple's gapping lower. Somebody must know something. Nope. No, no, nope. They probably don't there's an endless series of buys and sells going through the market and the overwhelming majority of those buys and sells have no particular Edge or informational Advantage. Could be a guy selling to pay for his divorce. It could be an asset manager reducing risk. Before he goes on vacation.  Could be tax loss selling that has nothing to do with the company. In question, don't assume that someone knows something when you see price moving,  if you're bearish Apple for 6, different reasons, and you've been watching a key level all week and apple, finally, breaks down through that level, then, by all means. So but don't be the traitor that just jumps on whatever's moving just because it's moving. If you find yourself doing that, stop, that's what bad Traders do.  That is what Traders with no plan do it is a trading equivalent of home. Take in real time.  Hindsight bias is also a constant feature of financial media. When you see a headline stocks rally on higher oil price, remember that journalists is riding with the benefit of hindsight. If you went back to the start of the day and asked people what stocks would do, if oil prices went up, you might get 50% saying, stocks would go down and 50% saying stocks would go up.  Journalists are storytellers, not Traders or financial professionals. They are always trying to make up stories to explain moves that are often driven by non- macro factors like flow and positioning.  There are many excellent Finance journalists, but there's also, the obligation for the financial media to tell a story based on fundamentals and macro when often that is not the driver of a market move.  You'll never see a headline like dollar Canada rallies as macro portfolio manager stops out of huge short because he's going on vacation.  If this is the reason dollar CAD rallies journalists will fabricate some sort. Of narrative that seems to fit in hindsight. That's their job.  Overall, you should be extremely skeptical of most articles in the financial press. They are not intentionally false, but they are biased almost exclusively to trying to fit a macroeconomic explanation. Even when short-term moves in markets, are often explained by other factors.  Don't talk about bad beats or ideas, you never put on or the times you get stopped out at the high or low. That's all just part of trading and nobody will find you interesting. If you tell them about these types of incidents always look forward,  Grizzly bias.  Compulsive bearishness is a bias that has not received as much coverage as other forms of Trader bias. The bearish bias in the market since 2008 is probably the costliest human bias in finance.  Think of all the money lost on S&P futures in the past 10 years, all the crashes, imminent blog posts, all the apocalyptic hedge fund. Bets crazy.  1-way Perma Bears, justify imminently lower Equity, prices is by referencing the bond market. If yields are going up, that's bad for earnings. Bad for margins, bad for borrowers, bad for severely indebted. Sovereigns, Etc. If yields go down it's what do bonds know or the rates Market, don't lie.  The relationship between stocks and bonds is fluid and for most of my lifetime stocks have been going up and bonds have been going up as well.  That's not to say, I will go on forever and it's certainly not happen in 2012. It's only to say that the stock market Bears, need better reasons than yields are going up or yields are going down in times of plentiful liquidity. It's perfectly logical for both stocks and bonds to go up up up and away.  Bears sound smarter than Bulls.  Research shows conclusively, that humans perceive people who present negative or pessimistic opinions as more intelligent than those who Express positive or optimistic opinions. bearish analysts are viewed as cutting through the noise while Bulls are often viewed as naive Fanboys, banging Pom, Poms together on CNBC  Strangely though the path of human progress is an undeniable upward Trend as dear dream, McCloskey put it quote.  Pessimism, sells for reasons, I've never understood people like to hear that the world is going to hell and become huffy and scornful when some idiotic Optimist intrudes on their pleasure.  Yet, pessimism has consistently been a poor Guide to the modern economic world and quote.  Similarly stocks mostly go up. Most of the time Morgan. Hazel puts it like this.  Quote, in investing, a bull sounds like a reckless cheerleader while a bear, sounds like a sharp mind who's Doug past the headlines. Despite the record of the S&P 500 Rising 18,000, fold over. The last century end quote  Yet, many of the best known Wall Street. Pundits are persistently pessimistic and many Of them have been around for decades. Think of all the famous bears in finance. I can make a list of 20 names without even Googling plenty of them. Have cool nicknames and there are even 2 different celebrity economists nicknamed, Dr. Doom. I find that funny.  These are all incredibly smart, guys who do amazing analysis, that mostly points to an imminent, large-scale bare market and yet the evidence shows these forecasts are almost always wrong. Why do we keep reading this stuff? Because it sounds really smart. The forecasting business has very little accountability and is mostly about marketing and sounding smart, not accuracy.  These Perma bears are famous and they're highly paid. How is this possible when stocks have spent most of their time in a bull market since 1980? If you always call for a bare market? And then what happens were you? Right? Answer. It doesn't matter, pessimism sells even if it's the wrong view, most of the time.  When you read a crash is imminent, piece. Ask yourself is the author praying on my inherent. Negativity, or is she actually providing useful and actionable Analysis supported by a verifiable track record?  There's an entire industry of Perma Bears because there's a steady demand for them. Don't Stoke that demand.  Perma Bears sound smart, they're entertaining and they reassure us that our intelligent skepticism is not misguided despite mountains of evidence to the contrary. The funny thing is, if these Perma Bears ever change their view, they lose followers and subscribers.  There's a tried and true strategy in the financial media. Adopt 1, dramatic worldview, stick to it, no matter what happens. And then sell sell, sell, sell sell. Sell it no matter what new information comes in to contradict your viewpoint.  As the saying goes, never let the facts get in the way of a good story to be clear. I'm not advocating. A Perma bull stance either that would be equally bad as a Trader. You need to be flexible. An open-minded, not Perma anything. This discussion is meant to make. You think about how pessimism is like intellectual candy. It tastes delicious, but it's generally bad for your Financial Health.  Negativity at sells positivity, everywhere. You look cynics and critics sound smart. People love to read negative stories. Here's a short excerpt from a study of how people perceive writers a book reviews.  Quote negative reviewers were perceived as more intelligent confident and expert than positive reviews. Even when the content of the positive review was independently, judged as being of higher quality and greater forcefulness end quote.  The same bias exists in non-financial news, multiple experiments show that people claim to prefer, positive news, but actually prefer to consume negative news. This negativity bias is part of human nature. Even infants, react to negative stimuli with more intensity than they do to positive. Stimuli When people of any age are subjected to 2 stimuli of equal, intensity 1, positive and 1 negative. The negative stimulus has a greater psychological impact than the positive 1.  Negative impressions are more Salient and more memorable.  Negativity is an attention magnet like McCloskey said, pessimism, sells be a rational consumer of information and do not allow smart sounding Perma Bears to bias your process. Ignore the Perma bears.  Stories of funds that set money on fire, trying to short stocks or plentiful 1 fund, I know opened in 2012 and the first trade they did was go short S&P futures.  The last trade they did before, shutting down in 2016, due to poor performance, was cover a short S&P futures position. Another fund made 22% on avonix, in 2013, but lost 18% on bearish S&P bets that same year and ended around flat overall. It's a costly. Bias when you trade you should always be equally able to go long or short risky assets if you can't, it's a major leak. You need to work on.  Warren Buffett said it best quote for 240 years. It's been a terrible mistake to bet against America and now is no time to start America's Golden Goose of Commerce and Innovation will continue to lay more and larger eggs and quote.  The gamblers fallacy and the hot hand.  The gambler's fallacy in the hot hand are 2 opposite but related forms of bias. Some people see a roulette wheel that comes up red 8 times in a row and they think black is due  Some win a few roles at the craps table and want to increase their bet size because they have the hot hand.  Thing is in randomly generated data. There are many streaks, they don't mean anything. They're just how random data sequences go 7, heads in a row does not impact the eighth flip. The coin has no memory. Probability has no memory.  There's no Supernatural element to probability. It's a mathematical construct. The intuition people get at casino tables is nonsense. If you had a hunch you were going to win and then you won. It's a coincidence. Every spin of a roulette wheel is mutually exclusive and each role of the dice in craps is independent of the last  In finance, things are trickier. If Tesla's up 10 days in a row, is it wildly overbought, and more likely to fall on day 11? Or is day 11? An independent event with no relationship to the prior 10 can be hard to say.  The best starting point is to assume each Financial minute hour and day is independent, from the last then be open to exceptions. A good example of this is seasonality  If Sterling is up, 8, April in a row does that mean it's more likely to go up in April of year? 9, probably not, there are 10 or 15 actively traded. Currency pairs in 12 months and every year. So, odds are high that if you look hard enough, you'll find some months that show a seasonal pattern, especially if your sample size is just 8 years, but this seasonal pattern is, probably simply a random streak. There are however, many examples of persistent non-random, seasonality and price patterns the Halloween effect, more commonly known as sell in May, and go away has been in existence for more than 300 years and has worked out of sample for decades. After it was discovered. It's almost impossible to dismiss this effect as an artifact of Randomness. It's far too persistent.  If a pattern is persistent, then we try to explain it in the case of Salam and go away. The explanation could be a pattern of human optimism where we start the year, optimistic eventually overshoot. Pull back from that bit of a rational exuberance then rally in Trend or the seasonal pattern could be related to flows people. Get bonuses in January tax, refunds in April And so on, and that money goes into the stock market.  Similarly, there are micro patterns of seasonality and repetition that make sense and repeat for a reason.  The first day of the month is a day when a big lump of automatic contributions go into US employee 401K retirement, plans a good proportion of these contributions end up in index funds and as such the first day of the month tends, to be a bullish day for stocks. Same goes for the start of the year.  There are other seasonal patterns like this in various markets. And ideally, when you spot a pattern, you want to be able to ascribe some sort of logic to it. If you can't assume it's random unless you're studying a large sample of data or have some other reason to think the streak is not just a product of chance.  The paper, the hot hand belief and the gambler's fallacy in investment decisions under risk is an excellent summary of 2 ways in which investors fail to understand that most of events are independent. Here's the Upstream. Quote, we conduct experiments to analyze investment behavior in decisions under risk. Subjects can bet on the outcome of a series of coin, tosses themselves rely on randomized, Experts, or choose a risk-free alternative.  We observe that subjects who rely on the randomized experts, pick, those who are successful in the past showing Behavior consistent with the hot hand, belief obviously the term expert suffices to attract some subjects.  For those who decided on their own. We find Behavior consistent with the gambler's fallacy as the frequency of betting on heads decreases. After streaks of heads.  And quote.  Assume most events in financial markets are independent. But always look for ones that are not when you find a pattern dig deeper, keep digging until you find patterns. That might logically repeat in the future, most streaks in patterns and finance are random, but not all of them.  There are literally hundreds of ways behavioral bias in. Balances Traders and investors. I've gone through a short list of some type of bias that I believe are particularly important but there's an entire academic field and a library full of books devoted to the topic at some point. Make sure you read Thinking Fast and Slow by Kahneman, Fooled by Randomness, by TB and irrational. Exuberance by Schiller, those are my 3 favorite books on behavioral Finance also just Google behavioral, bias, trading occasionally and go down the rabbit hole of academic research and blog posts.  It is such an interesting topic and there are many people reading about it. And researching it, passionately, humans are so silly, they'll never be a shortage of foils to unpack.  Before we complete this chapter on rational thinking I want to venture into the weird and wonderful world of counterintuitive. Math facts, I want to open your eyes to just how counterintuitive mathematical reality can be.  Your takeaway from this section should be that. It's important to coldly examine your assumptions and interpretations when looking at data because your intuition can often be wrong.  Also, Math is Fun.  Counterintuitive math, facts. Quote education has made all the difference for me. It builds software for your brain,  Mathematics taught me to reason logically and understand numbers tables charts and calculations even more. Valuable I learned at an early age to teach myself and quote  Edward Thorp a man for all markets.  1 of the most fun parts of math is that even though it's 100% objective and rational, it can still surprise us and it can still sometimes feel a little bit like magic.  Part of acquiring a higher level in rational understanding of math and probability is to Simply understand that math. Statistics and probability are not always 100% intuitive.  Many empirical and statistical outcomes can be surprising.  In this section, I'll take a look at a few instances, not so much because these specific examples are important for trading.  But more. So you can see that it's worth challenging your system 1 assumptions. If you want to get to the right, mathematical answers Alpha Traders, have a strong basic understanding of numbers and statistics.  You should constantly be working to improve your numeracy.  The counterintuitive, math, facts that follow highlight, just how wrong your gut can be when it jumps to conclusions and should reinforce that your slow. Rational mind is where it's at.  Example, 1 a and 1 B, the bat and ball problem.  The classic counterintuitive, math problem is the bat and ball problem.  If you've not heard this before, take a quick second to answer, the question is a baseball bat and a ball cost A110 total. The bat costs a dollar more than the ball. How much does the ball cost?  Did you answer 10 cents?  that's the standard system 1 answer, but if you stop to think for just a moment, To see the answer is 5 cents.  This is question 1 on the cognitive reflection test discussed earlier. It shows how if we listen to our gut, we get the wrong answer, our brains can take data and jump to seemingly logical but completely wrong conclusions. Slow down and use system 2 for mathematical analysis. Evaluate alternative hypothesis. Even when the answer seems obvious,  When it comes to trading, the more obvious, the conclusion, the more likely it is already priced into the market and thus, the more likely the trade you enter based on the conclusion will lose money.  Another quick 1, you have thousand dollars. Split evenly between 10, stocks. They all drop 1%. What? Percentage of your portfolio. Did you just lose in total? Most people get that 1 write. The answer is 1%, but they hear the wrong answer in their head first. 10%,  again, another example of 2 systems, operating at the same time, inside your head  Example, 2 up. Down up down, is actually down, $100 stock goes down. 10%, 1 day. Then up. 10% the next. What's the stock worth now?  If you answered 100 dollars, you use system 1 and you are wrong.  If you answered 99 you use system 2 and you're right.  This is another simple example of a mathematical result. That is not always obvious on first inspection. If you ask someone, what happens to a stock that goes down, 20% 1 day, then up, 20% the next their knee-jerk or system. 1 response would be that the stock is unchanged.  But anyone that worked at Lehman Brothers in 2008 knows that if something goes down 20% Then up 20% over and over. It will eventually end up much much lower and there's a Nifty chart in the PDF  This truth can be painful in trading, if you lose 10% of your Capital, you need to make 11.1% to get back to Flat. If you drop 50% of your Capital, you need to double to Recover, if you lose your mind and drop 90% of your Capital, you'll need to make 1,000% just to get back to Flat the further you fall from your starting Capital, the harder it will be to ever come back.  Example, 3, the birthday paradox.  Here's a simple 1. There are 70 people in a room. What are the odds that 2 of them will have the same birthday?  If you don't know this problem, you might start with 70 divided by 365 and realize it's much higher than that. So maybe guess like 50% 60%.  How about 99.9%?  Most people's intuition is to start with 1 birthday and think through the odds of someone in the room having that birthday. But really all you need is 1 of any of 70 birthdays to match any other birthday in the room.  And in the PDF, there's a chart and it shows that basically once you get past 23 people, you already add a 50/50 shot of 2 matching birthdays.  I learned this. How many years ago and it still gives me a mild case of vertigo when I think about it. It's weirdly counterintuitive.  When you analyze Market data and come to conclusions, make sure you're confident that your conclusions are logical. Not just intuitive, logical, even if something seems obvious check it think about it.  The next example is nonlinear craziness, when you go to a casino, you know, you have a good chance of losing. But do you truly appreciate how your Equity evolves over time in an environment with negative leakage? Think about this, if you start the night with a hundred dollars and play a fair game, 50% chance of winning at $1 to win. $1, what are the odds you'll hit plus 100 before you lose your 100?  Uh, trick question because it's not a trick 50%.  Okay. Now, what are the odds you get to 100 before losing 100 in the same 1 dollar game, but now the odds of winning are 49.5%  The answer is only 11. .5% of the time you'll get to plus 100 before minus 100.  What about if the odds in the game are 49%, then you only win a hundred dollars 1.8% of the time.  As you repeat a game with Negative Edge, the probability of loss is nonlinear, this is why the only way to make money at a casino is with highly variable or lumpy bets. If you want maximum odds to win in Vegas, go to the roulette table when you arrive put your entire stake on black or red,  Another strategy is to place. Lumpy Bets with your 100 dollars. Bet $50 then $2. $60 and $1 at least this way you have a chance. Any methodical application of a strategy that has a sub 50% win rate will lead to almost guaranteed loss.  When I'm trading badly, my p&l kind of looks like the $1 bet with the 49% odds.  Note that this is just an example of how math can be counterintuitive. Takeaway should not be that you want a randomly, make lumpy bet. Concentrating in trading your bet. Sizing, should eliminate risk of Ruin, be proportionate to conviction, level be large enough. Even if it's a low conviction, trade to move the needle towards your goal.  Finally note that if your capital is slowly bleeding lower over an extended period, it is a sign that you have Negative Edge.  In the PDF. There's a chart of 10 simulations of a 4852 game where you risk 1 to make 1 dollar. If your p&l chart has that steady top left to bottom, right? Skew, like the simulation. It's time to think about your Edge as it disappeared have, markets changed and you did not adapt. Are you paying too much in transaction costs?  The next example is survivors and incomplete samples. People don't always think about whether their sample is complete or biased.  In World War II. The US Navy, wanted to reduce the number of its fighter planes, being shot down and wanted to add armor. At various points to reinforce the fighters, armor increases a plane's weight, and makes it less efficient. So, you need to be selective about where to put armor. The statisticians. In the wartime, statistical research group received a diagram showing data, with a whole bunch of bullet holes, all over the place on the wings, the center of the fuselage and the tail.  The diagram is in the PDF. So the intuitive or obvious answer was to reinforce the areas that are getting hit by enemy fire, the wings fuselage and tail. Look like natural places to add armor since they get shot up the most  but legendary mathematician, Abraham Wald, ignored the intuitive answer and thought more deeply. He thought to ask, why are there so many holes in the fuselage and wings but no bullet holes in the engines.  This is like asking why are there so many, ER, patients with gunshot wounds to the arm. But so few with gunshot wounds to the heart even though both sections of the human, Body are in a similar area.  The answer of course, is that the planes that got shot in, the engine went down and were destroyed, so they couldn't be examined.  There are no bullet holes in the engines of the planes that return to base because the planes that are shot in the engine, don't make it back to base victims, shot in the heart, don't make it to the ER,  Survivorship bias is the phenomenon where we evaluate a sample say planes returning from Battle or mutual funds.  And then draw conclusions based on that sample with without considering all the parts of the sample that did not survive, we look at planes that return to base without considering the ones that got shot down.  We look at performance of existing mutual funds without considering all the ones that went out of business, this is another way we misinterpret data.  Here's 1 way this applies to trading a friend of yours shows. You a specific strategy that earned 1,155 returns last month. Your first reaction might be. Wow, tell me more. When really you're First reaction should be, what other strategies did you test before coming up with this 1? When analyzing data look for missing evidence, this is a common trick in the sports. Gambling industry, say the tigers are playing the Bears tonight. You send 10,000 emails at to new prospects. 5,000 of the emails, read attention, subscribers, gold, star guaranteed pick. Tonight is Tigers to win and 5,000 say, attention, subscribers are gold, star are guaranteed pick. Tonight, is Bears to win.  Then they wait to see who wins. Let's say it's the Tigers.  The next game is Lions versus Panthers.  The marketer now takes the list of 5,000 emails that received the correct. Tigers pick email and splits those into 2 groups of 2500, half the emails, predict the Lions and have predict the Panthers.  They do this twice more. Now, they have a list of 625 people that just received 4 straight, gold star, pick winners, then they call up those 600. 25 prospects, many of whom are suitably impressed. Nobody else had the Panthers to beat the lions in that game.  And try to close the deal on a 1200, a year subscription to the gold star pick sheet.  Those betters that got the 4 Acura emails in a row. Now have to be pretty smart to think of the Hidden evidence. They might be missing more likely their emotional desire to win. Overrides their logical or rational mind and they hand their credit card. Number over to the waiting operator  Numbers on their own. Do not always tell the full story. You need to think more deeply about conclusions and treat. Even the most obvious answers with rational skepticism remember. Skepticism is not cynicism, it doesn't mean you assume everything is wrong and everyone's lying and nothing is true.  Alpha Traders filter information with slow system 2 Thinking. Even if the conclusion drawn from that information seems simple or obvious at first  Skepticism is a healthy state of mind. That represents quality thinking. The healthy skeptic understands that most knowledge is uncertain to some degree and looks to support statements with evidence.  She listens to experts but does not take their claims or forecasts at face value. She uses research and logic to see through false claims and avoid Hasty incorrect conclusions.  The goal of this section was not to provide examples of counterintuitive math that you could apply directly to your Trading.  The idea instead is to get you thinking on the next level, don't just scan the surface of information you receive and let it make its way into your mind. Unfiltered think, deeply, seek accuracy, and truth, and identify, and ignore bad thinking. When you encounter it,  That concludes our discussion of counterintuitive math. I hope you found it interesting and fun and I hope that it shakes you up a bit and gets you thinking more actively about your own thinking. If you enjoyed this section I highly recommend Daryl Huff's book how to lie. Statistics, it's a classic that explains in clear language. How innocent looking data and statistics, can often be devilishly deceptive, be curious, be open-minded seek evidence, that is the essence of high quality thinking.  This is also a useful rule when you run into common knowledge in markets, don't just listen to pundits and take their word or accept their forecasts at face value.  quite often even Wall Street professionals on Bloomberg or CNBC will spout non-truths as if they were fact be on the lookout for statements that are presented as fact but could be totally false  When you hear forecasts, no matter how smart the person sounds assume, they are probably pretty random analyzed declarations, verify them with data, and come to your own conclusions.  here are a few examples of questionable, common knowledge that you hear in markets all the time,  Higher interest rates are bad for stocks.  Fact check you usually not true. Very often when interest rates are rising. It is in response to a strong economy. Strong economy can be good for stocks. If the central bank is accommodative and bad for stocks, if it leads the central bank, to hike into restrictive territory,  Rising interest rates and falling bond prices. Can be good or bad for stocks. Depends on many factors especially where the FED is in the cycle.  2 bonds are smarter than stocks or the bond market knows something or the bond market smells a rat in the economy. Fact check false  Bond Traders, sit only a few rows from Equity, traders in most banks. They have the same information as multi-asset macro PMS, with billions of capital under management Bond Traders. Do not have access to secret information about the economy that is kept hidden from traders in every other asset class. No, no, no no, no, no.  Many Perma pundits feel nauseous when they see the stock market going up. So they'll come up with any excuse for what? By the rally is on thin ice or set to falter.  If bonds happen to be rallying with stocks these fear pedalling pundits, assume that the bond market has some sort of secret information that hasn't yet been disclosed to the stock market. They will say that the bond market knows something. And stocks are going to crash any minute, the relationship between stocks and bonds is complicated and varies considerably, depending on the regime. It depends what part of the economic and Fed rate, hike or rate cut cycle. The world is in any simplistic comment, formulated as bonds are doing X. So stocks should do, why is a waste of time?  The stock versus bond relationship is dynamic and unstable.  3 gold is a safe haven fact, check kind of, but not really a safe haven is an asset that goes up or holds its value. During periods of risk, aversion funds. Typically performed this role though with interest rates approaching zero in 2020, that role was questioned going. Forward the Japanese Yen and Swiss franc are traditionally viewed as safe havens though their role as safe havens has diminished in recent years due to Central Bank and semi-official currency intervention Gold's behavior during periods. Of risk. Aversion depends mostly on positioning and overall Financial market and dollar liquidity.  The correlation between changes in the price of gold and changes in stock, prices is usually mildly positive, meaning gold, and stocks, go up and down together a tad and in the PDF, I have uh, simple table to quickly demonstrate. I looked at the worst 25 weeks for the stock market, the largest fall in percentage terms between 1980 and 2020. Then I checked what gold did during those same weeks.  If gold was a safe haven, it would reliably remain unchanged or go higher at these moments. The table shows the results. And it almost looks like a random series, the average move for gold in big down weeks for stocks is minus 0.4%. There are 13 down weeks versus 15 up. The takeaway is that gold is not a reliable. Safe Haven if stocks collapse. Gold might go up or it might go down.  Another piece of common knowledge is bad. Economic news is bad for stocks fact checks sometimes true.  The economy is 1 of many, many, many factors that influence stock prices analysts often overweight, the importance of the economy, when discussing stocks and giant question marks appear over their heads as they discuss the baffling Divergence between equities and the economy.  Sometimes it's all about the economy, sometimes, the economy has nothing to do with stocks.  Often, nobody really understands what's driving the stock market in either direction. And most of the analysis, you see, is simply xpost, rationalization for things that have already happened. If we really understood stocks, we could probably predict them better.  There are so many variables that can drive a wedge between stocks and the economy, for example. Excess liquidity. Provided by central banks expectations of future. Economic conditions are often more important than the current economic situation or economic numbers.  Valuations, expand and contract in the same direction as the economy or in the opposite direction.  Supply and demand. If companies are buying back stock, other companies are going private m&a. Activity is frenzy and Retail Traders are furiously opening new accounts. There can be a mismatch between supply and demand for stocks these technical factors do not always correlate with economic growth and sentiment. If everyone's raging bullish and caught in speculative, Mania economics, don't matter much stocks are going higher.  And the last piece of common knowledge that you will see, very regularly is that the stock market is going to crash this week this month. Any day whenever  Fear sells dire predictions, get clicks predicting crashes, is a great media strategy, this is a fact and it has been confirmed. Confirmed by a huge pile of research.  The fact that the stock market is about to crash is common knowledge on many websites and is a frequent theme on Twitter. People are always saying this yet. Oddly enough, the stock market, barely ever crashes. Take a look at history.  Regularly predicting a crash is for people that want clicks and followers, not for people that want to make money.  When you see nonsense like stocks can't fight gravity forever, remember the chart of the S&P 500 since World War II? It has gone up, up up and away.  Prices operate in a vacuum. There is no gravity most people that successfully predicted a crash in the past. Say 2008, just predict crashes, all the time, a stopped clock is right, twice a day.  Here are some statistics about the stock market, that I hope will dissuade you from joining the Perma bears.  Stocks go up 53% of days 57% of weeks. 60% of the months and 72%. Of all years.  It is true that stocks have a left tail, which means that the fastest craziest moves in the stock market are down, not up. This is part of the reason, it's more fun to be bearish than bullish. You're more likely to get instant gratification.  There is a crash, 15% drop in 1 month about once every 5 to 8 years. Still despite the 4 crashes between 2000 and 2020, the S&P went from 1320 to 3420 in that period.  Including 4 Separate months. When stocks ripped Higher by more than 15%, if your goal is to make money trading, you should be comfortable shifting between long or short, risky assets, depending on market conditions. You should trade with that a directional bias. It's fine to be bearish. Just don't let it become your religion.  Don't be a Perma bear. Don't be a Perma bull.  Keep an open mind and analyze the evidence then make a rational and unbiased short-term forecasts of Market Direction. That's the Sense of good Trading.  All right, well that concludes chapter 7, our discussion of rational and unbiased thinking.  The biggest challenge with human bias is that studies show that even when we know about a bias, we can still fall victim to it.  Therefore, it's important not just to know about various forms of bias and bad thinking, but to implement strategies and tactics to counteract bias in a rigorous and systematic way.  At this point, I hope you have a better understanding of the characteristics that make up an alpha Trader and where you are strong medium and weak.  I hope I've given you a few new ideas on how to improve your trading, tighten up your game, eliminate leaks and become more self-aware.  That's part 2 done. Now it's time for some fun stuff. I've laid the groundwork and it's time to take action. You know what? It means to be a rational thinking Trader and you've learned many of the strengths and weaknesses that in Heads or hamper. Trading success. Now let's talk markets.  In part 3, we look at how to become an expert in your Market. That's chapters 8 to 10 then, examine the topic of risk management in Chapter 11,  Chapter 12 brings the entire book together as I explain exactly how I come up with structure and execute trade ideas. Finally, I walk you through a detailed real life. Trade example. In a way that I hope you'll find both interesting and informative. You are more than halfway through the book. Let's move to part 3.  Part 3, methodology and Mathematics quote nothing in the world is worth having or worth doing. Unless it means effort pain difficulty. I've never in my life, envied a human being who had an easy life end quote. Theater Roosevelt. In part 3. I'll outline specific steps. You must take to master your Market. Your goal must be to become an expert in the product or markets that you trade. Stay narrow focus on 1 or 2 markets and go deep learn as much as possible. Write down to the nitty-gritty details.  This approach gives you the best shot at a sustainable Edge wide and shallow can work, but has much lower probability of success than narrow and deep.  Here's the abstract of an interesting study of Twitter sentiment that supports the idea that narrow Focus yields a higher returns.  Quote, using tweets, from stock twits, and machine learning classification techniques. We find that social media sentiment predicts positively, and significantly future stock returns, and importantly such positive predictability decreases when the number of stocks users follow increases,  The return predictability appears to stem from users ability. Ability to forecast, future earnings.  Further tests reveal that reduced predictability due to stock coverage is significant only for terms that are complex opaque and thus hard to analyze.  The evidence suggests that stock analysis by users with a more complex portfolio is inferior due to attention and time constraints end quote.  Keywords here, attention and time constraints. You have a limited supply of attention and time and the more you spread it out the less chance you have of achieving mastery.  I can 100% confirm this from experience traders, who Master 1 area succeed, much more often than traders that dabble in every Market. That is why the term macro tourists tend to be used in a derogatory way.  A macro tourist is a Trader or investor who takes a position in a market, they don't know very well in an attempt to profit from a popular narrative.  The appearance of macro tourists often makes the locals. Want to run for the Hills.  Locals have expert knowledge and can find a great meal for a reasonable price, tourists eat at overpriced restaurants and leave disappointed.  The next 3 chapters will outline the 3 steps. You must take to become an expert in your Market Step 1. Understand micro structure. Step 2 understand the narrative, and finally step 3. Understand technicals positioning and sentiment.  Do the work to master these 3 areas and you're on the way to trading success.  Think of the examples ahead as starting points for the Deep dive, you will take into your own Market, each product, and security trades differently, and has its own idiosyncrasies.  I hope I give you enough detail here to teach you some aspects that I find important. I also want to open your eyes to the many different ways 1 can think about analyze and study markets.  Ultimately, you should be able to analyze and dissect. The markets you trade using a framework, you've created. In other words, the examples and ideas, I present in these chapters are not exhaustive, take my ideas and build on them, come up with your own, smarter better more up-to-date ideas, think about a long game where each day you stack more and more expertise on top of your existing knowledge, always maintain a philosophy of continuous Improvement and lifelong learning.  The 2 greatest sources of edge in trading are expert, level, knowledge of a specific market and a rigorous execution and risk management. Process to succeed. You must know your product inside and out and you must have a process that maximizes leverage but also eliminates risk of ruin.  Then you are smarter more knowledgeable and more Nimble than the competition and built to survive in the long run.  Part 3 is a study of the specific methodologies and Mathematics. You need to understand to achieve these goals.  Let's go to chapter 8, where we'll go into some depth on a topic. I've always found supremely fascinating Market. Micro structure.  Chapter 8, understand micro structure.  Step 1 towards becoming an expert in your Market.  Excellent Traders, understand micro structure and have a deep knowledge of the products. They trade, this chapter will explain how to become an expert in micro structure and how to use this deeper understanding to make more money Trading.  You're playing in 1 of the most complex competitive games in the world. You can't dabble in 14 products and expect to have an edge. Occasionally Traders can be experts in a particular strategy and apply that strategy across products. But in general, most traders that succeed have knowledge. That is narrow and deep, not shallow and wide. They are product experts.  How do you become an expert? Read? Observe study.  Let's say you've been trading for a while with that much success, so you decide to day trade, Tesla and focus. Discuss all your energy. There, you'll trade. Nothing else. There are pros and cons to trading Tesla, like any stock Pros. It's liquid. It's volatile. There are opportunities in the stock every day. Many non-professionals Trade It.  Cons. There are thousands of people trading it who probably know more than you do.  It's extremely volatile, many Traders are biased 1 way or the other, when it comes to Tesla because of their love or hate for the product and or it's Larger than Life, founder never trade the stock of a company. You have an emotional connection to  So, how do you become an expert in Tesla? You start by studying its micro structure start by watching the price action for a few days. How does it trade on the open, on the clothes? Who are the players, trading it, and talking about it? What's the average daily range? Average hourly range? What's the average range on the day after earnings? How does liquidity vary by time of day? Does it trade differently around option? Expiries? How big are the close to open gaps? After news? Comes out.  Those are sample, questions, you might want to ask about microstructure. Let me explain microstructure in detail so that you can ask the right questions in your Market. A Market's microstructure is determined by the following 1 types of participants 2 liquid, which means transaction costs and bid offer spread plus Gap risk 3 in activity patterns and 4 volatility.  Let's start with the brief discussion of Market participants then make our way through the list.  Market participants.  Who trades your product?  Depending on your seat. You may have more or less visibility into who trades your product and who does not. If you trade features, you have very little insight. Well, if you're a market maker, you have a ton of insight. When I was day, trading equities, I could often figure out by studying the level 2 screen all day which market makers mattered and which did not  In general, there are 6 Major Market. Secret participants 1 retail people sitting at home trading their own money or trading on their phones, the influence of retail varies from minimal most of the time to Total dominance like Hertz stock in April 2020.  Even in the largest market of All Foreign Exchange, retail can matter. For example, Japanese retail investors can move the entire currency Market, sometimes with large mean reversion and stop-loss activity.  2 institutional.  There are 5 main types of Institutions, A banks commercial and investment banks are active players in most Securities. They act as market makers, agents principles and speculators B real money.  This is traditional investor Capital usually invested in stocks and bonds but also other asset classes its pensions mutual funds 401K money Etc.  C hedge funds. These are pools of capital formed to invest and generate Alpha hedge funds. Execute a wide range of strategies from Trend following and systematic to discretionary macro.  Hedge fund activity, tends to be heard like in aggregate even though many individual portfolio managers run individual and unique strategies.  Hedge funds, generally employ more leverage than other institutional participants.  D corporates, corporations issue, stock buyback, stock hedge via Futures buy and sell currencies to hedge income and balance sheet, exposure, Etc. Their activity is hard to track unless you work at a bank  Decision-making tends to be more time of the year or transaction focused not Market or macro driven, that is a company. Might have a large need to buy euros due to a cross border acquisition. That does. Not necessarily mean they are bullish Euro, they just need to buy the Euros to complete their asset purchase.  And E central banks.  Central banks around the world. Hold huge reserves and manage those reserves by investing in countries and securities they expect to Outperform.  Second central banks, buy and occasionally sell assets as a part of their monetary policy. The Federal Reserve bought a laundry list of Assets in 2020 in response to the massive economic damage caused by Co 19.  Central Bank participation in some asset markets, is the primary determinant of price while they are secondary actors in other markets  Who are the players in your Market? Can you identify any particular activity by specific participants?  In some markets, this is impossible, but is worth thinking about your market and whether or not you can monitor the activity of the largest players and use this as an input into your process.  Below, are some examples of how to monitor these players.  This is mostly expert level stuff that you would not know when you're just starting out. As you spend more time, studying your Market, you'll learn how to identify what the big players are up to  Here are 6 real world examples of how you can see the larger. Participants Action.  1. There's a well-known pattern where large real money flows. Take place in currency markets on the last day of each month, peaking at 4 p.m. London time.  I'll give a short example later in the chapter.  2. If you're trading equities study the supply and demand from institutions on the level 2 screen, while the level 2 info was much more useful and yielded, much more Edge in the late 1990s and early 2000s. There is still value in watching and studying it.  3 track, crossborder, mergers, and Acquisitions to monitor possible. Currency flows, 4 monitor Equity moves around triple witching as market makers and Real Money. Hedgers Trade actively  5 study essential Banks activities and operations and see if there's any pattern to trading activity. When the central bank is active in the market versus when it is not  There's an impact markets at a particular time of day or price level.  And 6, learn how. Trade on the day, they are added to the S&P 500 Index. As real money adds the stock to stay on Benchmark and trade that pattern.  Think about what you know about the various actors in your market and see if you can unpack. Any useful predictive information about future moves by analyzing their actions. It sounds esoteric but in most markets there is some visibility into what people are doing. Especially if you read like a fiend.  Note that due to efficient markets patterns that become well known tend to lose their predictability over time.  Assume markets are very but not perfectly efficient.  When you think you've found an inefficiency or exploitable pattern in the market, be skeptical. But optimistic don't be so naive as to think there are high sharp pots of gold lying around all over the place but also don't fall into the negative trap of these 2 economists who believe that every good idea has already been found.  Here's a joke. 2, economists are walking down the street when 1 points to the ground. That says, look at 10 dollar bill.  The second economists replies. That's crazy. If that was a ten dollar bill, someone would have picked it up already.  This is a common trap in all areas of innovation.  You have an idea for a novel and you think nah, I'm sure that's been done before.  Or you think of a product idea and Imagine, ah, someone must have thought of that already. That's a losing mentality. New ideas are the absolute lifeblood of capitalism and creativity. Never dismiss any idea on the Assumption. Someone must have already thought of it.  2 liquid.  Understand liquidity, some products like FX are extremely liquid, and trade continuously all day and all week, some markets, like Lumber and wheat are much less liquid. They trade short sessions with a defined open and close and offer minimal price, transparency, and poor liquidity outside. Primary trading hours, some assets trade freely all the time. While some futures Contracts can hit limit up or limit down for multiple days in a row leaving specs trapped on the wrong side.  How does your product trade is there? Plenty of liquidity all the time or do you need to consider liquidity when you execute?  Let's drill into liquidity, a bit. So you can think about the specific features of your Market  Transaction costs and bid ask spread.  The difference between the bid and the ask in a market is called the spread.  Transaction costs are the amount of spread you pay when you trade.  Spread time number of units. Equals transaction cost.  If the bid and apple is 350 and the ask is $150.88, the spread is 8 cents. This is often expressed either as a percentage of the mid price or in basis points.  So 8 cents divided by 3504.  Is 0.029, which is 2.9 basis points.  A basis point is 1/100. Of 1%. Therefore for example 1% is 100 basis points.  2.9 basis points is 1 of the tightest bid offer spreads, you will ever see.  Spreads very dramatically by asset class. And by product within an asset class in FX spreads in euro dollar, the most liquid pair are often less than 1/10 of spreads in dollar turkey, the Turkish Lera.  The bid ask in a small cap or micro cap, stock could be 50 times. The Apple bid ask gold trades way, tighter than Palladium, spreads in credit, are generally wider than spreads, in fixed income, spreads in agricultural. Commodities are generally wider than spreads in short-term interest rate, Futures and so on.  Every Market has a different texture and part of this. Texture comes from the bid offer spread trading activity. On each side of the spread is called, bid, ask bounce.  Think about your average trade size and call that 1 unit. How much does it cost you to trade 1 unit in normal markets? for example, if you're a normal trade size is 10 million euro dollar and Euro dollar trades, 2 Pips wide, and 10 million, so 1 pip equals 0.001,  Each round-trip buy and sell cost and dollars.  That is to say if the market in euro dollar is bid at 1:10, 000 and offered at 1:10 02 and you buy and sell without the market moving you paid 0.002.  In transaction costs, which is $0 per 10 million transaction.  Don't worry too much about the math here. These are just examples.  When you buy and sell stocks at zero commission, you're still paying the toll of somewhere between 0.02% and 0.5% that is 2 to 50 basis points.  Due to the bid ask spread.  Some stocks are much wider than 50 basis points, but you probably should not be trading those.  Spreads and commissions are the main reason trading is a negative sum game. Not a zero sum Spread is the invisible enemy like a slow leak in a tire. It costs you a ton of p&l but it can be very hard to observe or measure correctly.  Tiffany is an active day trader. She executes 15 round trips per day, 15 buy and 15 sells and the stock she specializes in Take 2, interactive has an average bid ask of 38 basis points.  That means if the Stock's trading at 173, the average bid ask is about 66 cents.  Her account size is 100,000 and her average trade size is 150 shares.  So she's leaking 150 shares times 15 round trips times 66 cents per round trip which is 1,485 per day times 5 days, that's 7,425 per week times, 48 weeks, that's 356,400 per year, insane, right? These are realistic assumptions and give you a good sense. Just how expensive it can be to cross big spreads.  She can reduce her transaction costs by using other execution strategies like, limit orders, but we don't know if this will hurt her performance. Obviously, she can't keep doing this for very long unless her strategy has significant Edge. If she use the same strategy, but switched over to Apple and we assumed 3 basis points bid asking Apple, her transaction costs dropped to 117 per day 585 per week or 28,000 per year. Now, I'm not saying, you should only trade Apple what I'm saying is that you should have a clear and thorough understanding of how much it costs you to transact. When you fully grow, how expensive it is to transact, you will probably trade less as we have discussed transacting, less is almost always a good thing.  Accurate data on bid offer, spreads can be hard to come by.  In FX, the bank's collect this data and some are willing to share it with clients While, others view it, as proprietary. And Stock market, the easiest thing to do is watch the stock you trade and take occasional snapshots of the spread.  Bid offer spreads in an individual stock will vary substantially by time of day and around events in times of stress. It offer, spreads can widen dramatically, but in normal markets, they're somewhat consistent. In other words, if Apple trades, 3 basis points, wide today at 10, a.m. it will probably trade around 3 basis points wide tomorrow. At 10 a.m. unless there's news or a profound change in the markets,  In contrast at the open 9:30 a.m. it could be tighter or wider. And at times of higher volatility, it will almost certainly trade wider your estimate of bid offer. Spreads does not have to be perfect, just eyeball it and multiply by your estimated number of Trades per day to get a rough sense of your transaction costs or TC.  TC is a slow and steady League that adds up substantially.  you need a significant Edge to make money in any Market because you don't just need to generate Alpha, you need to generate Alpha net of transaction costs.  In the PDF I have 4 charts that show. The theoretical, p&l for 2 different Traders, the thin Grey Line shows the p&l before transaction costs and the black line shows p&l after TC or net.  I used realistic bid offer spreads to show the impact of trading costs on 2 real estate p&l streams so you can get a sense of the enormous strain TC exerts on performance.  You should not obsess over TC, but you need to be smart about it.  Most of all you need to quantify and monitor it. TC is a serious and important League that you need to reduce as much as possible.  At the same time TC is a cost of doing business and trading and you don't want an unhealthy approach to reducing TC that could jeopardize your reputation or your future liquidity be smart, but not obsessive about reducing TC. We'll discuss some ways to do this in the section on execution, Chapter 12.  Gap risk.  Another element of liquidity is Gap risk. There are 3 types of Gap risk. The first is when markets closed and then reopen, a stock closes at $50 on Friday. And then over the weekend, their CFO quits, and the company announces. They fired, their auditor that doesn't sound good. The stock opens at twenty 5 dollars on Monday morning. Yikes, if you have a 50,000 account and you went home long at 2x margin, you're done ruined, that's gap risk. Number 1,  Usually, the timing of closed to open Gap risk. Like, that can be predicted, in advance, since we know the trading hours of whatever security we trade, but this is not 100% the case many features have trading limits. If they move a certain amount trading is halted,  individual stocks are often halted for pending news or due to extreme volatility. You must have a complete understanding of how your Market functions and avoid. Risk of Ruin before everything else.  The second type of Gap risk relates to events when the US jobs report comes out the first Friday of each month at 8:30, a.m. you'll often see S&P futures and Len and other markets, jump to a new level without trading continuously from A to B.  For example, Delian might be trading at 112 at 82929.  And then the jobs number comes in strong and the first trade after 8:30 a.m. could be 1 12608. If you go into the number short and don't have a good understanding of the Gap risk, you might get wrecked.  After economic releases and events, there's usually a fast market for 5 or ten minutes as well. So not only do you need to worry about Gap risk but also liquidity risk, even if your trading small size, it can be difficult to get in and out of fast markets. You might deal on wrong prices or get error messages or if you trade bigger size simply find you cannot transact your full amount.  Like I said earlier, unless you think you have a big Edge on the number or the event, go in flat and react.  The third type of Gap risk comes from markets that are pegged capped, or floored by central banks, or other entities. When famous example of this is the Euro Swiss floor at 120, the Swiss National Bank tried to enforce an exchange rate. And eventually when they gave up the largest 1-day move in the history of Foreign Exchange happen in about 2 hours Euro, Swiss traded from 1.2 to 0.85 in a matter of minutes that is absolutely insane.  Pegs and caps and floors are most common in FX markets, but also show up in equity markets in the days, after an IPO.  Market makers, representing the investment banks that underwrote the IPO are permitted to intervene in the market, to stabilize the price of the stock if it starts to fall below the IPO price.  This stabilization bit is not infinite. At some point, the underwriter will say Enough is enough and pull away and the stock will usually Gap aggressively lower.  There's a fantastic piece about the Facebook IPO stabilization effort on the Liberty Street, economics blog.  In the PDF, there's a chart that shows the number of shares on the bid, which are the vertical bars and may increase as Facebook shares price reached $38, which was the IPO price on its first day of trading.  Huge bids came in from the underwriter of the Facebook IPO.  The chart shows that the underwriter made a concerted effort to buy nearly infinite stock at 38 Traders, might see this huge intervention and think it's smart to go long with the stop below 38. Generally, that is not the right way to look at situations like this.  Instead, you should realize that the price is badly out of equilibrium.  With 1 buy and Myriad Cellars. The stock is out of line. And the second, the buyer disappears, it's going to be chaos as the price will Gap lower in search of equilibrium.  The second chart on the same page of the p. Shows the first day of trading. Plus the next 5 days, when the stock opened the day, after the IPO, the stabilization bid wasn't their Facebook got lower? Lungs were lucky. If they got out at 34, the stock did not trade back above 38 again for more, than a year.  Well, it's tempting to go with the market Distortion, Like the Facebook stabilization bid or the SMB bid neuroses at 120.  Counterintuitively, the best move is often to go against it.  When you follow an intervention bid, you're dead. If that bid disappears, if you go short against it and the price rallies, there will probably be a reasonable price where you can get out.  When an entity is supporting the price of a security or currency pair, it is usually reasonable to assume that that price is out of equilibrium and the entity supporting it is the only source of demand unless you have an edge in predicting. What that entity is going to do. You should stay away these setups present, huge gap risk and can lead to risk of ruin. Many retail investors and some large well-known hedge funds were ruined by the SNB fail at 120.  Is it worth betting, your job, your client's capital, or your entire fund on a single trade? No, never.  When Gap, brisk is Extreme or hard to estimate avoid it, the risk is never worth the reward.  Be thoughtful about major Gap risks in your product and avoid them.  This does not mean you can never carry a position through economic data, gaps around, economic data can be reasonably estimated. What it does mean is you should not go short, a tech bubble stock in earnings. You should not go long dollar, Hong Kong at the bottom of the band and you should seriously consider your weekend positions and whether or not they are worth it. Oil, can Gap 10% over a weekend Delian can get 100250 Pips  Avoid Gap risk.  That concludes our discussion of Gap risk. Now, let's visit 1 of my favorite topics and Area, where true experts shine, a field of study that can be an underappreciated source of edge.  The idiosyncratic intraday trading patterns of each asset class.  Intraday activity patterns.  Every Market has a specific pattern that it follows on average. During the day, think about your favorite Market Are there specific times of day when volume and volatility spike in currency markets. For example, there's a long list of key times that FX Traders need to know, including the US Open, economic data options, expiry wmrf, figs Tokyo fix Etc,  Hedge fund portfolio managers. And other large institutional Traders need to know how liquidity es and flows in their products over the course of the day.  If you want to take a big position in dollar Yen, for example, you should know that 1057 a.m. New York or 357 p.m. London is a much better time to put it on than 11:51 a.m. Because FX is the best from 7 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. New York. Even small lot Traders need to know these patterns because they affect not only liquidity but also volatility and volumes.  What are the key times of day for the products, you trade. Let's take a look at a few major markets so you can get an idea of how time of day activity varies, in different asset classes.  Volume by time of day for major markets.  if you're an expert in the market or products you trade, you'll know, every important time of day and you'll know the distribution of volume by time of day  First, this is useful because it tells you when the real moves happen in your Market, if there's very little volume going through the probability of random, meaningless moves is higher.  Second, if you need to transact, meaningful size, volume by time of day, is even more important, as it tells you the trading time that minimizes your footprint.  Third intraday volume spikes, often reveal important. Moments in the day, like fixing and data releases.  Let's look at a few major markets.  In the PDF, I'll show you the volume by time of day and 5 minute increments and then give you a few short takeaways.  Let's start with spooz or S&P futures.  The first chart shows volume by time of day, for S&P futures, you can see there are huge spikes on the open and closed with dwindling volumes that trough at lunchtime.  The chart explains why most day Traders make most of their money from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. and 3 p.m. to 4 p.m.  This was 100% true for me. When I was trading the NASDAQ, if you trade stocks, concentrate your efforts around the busy times and eat lunch, do research and lift weights from 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. New York.  10-year bonds.  The next chart shows Ty features which is the US. 10 year note Futures Contract. The volume pattern for this. 1 is not too surprising though that huge burst at 3. 3 p.m. is larger than I would have guessed before I made the chart. Otherwise volumes are high in the New York morning. With little spikes around the economic data volumes are super low until London comes in 7 a.m. GMT or 2 a.m. New York and pick up substantially when the US gets to work.  The 3M spike is the close of the Chicago Board of Trade many strategies and funds Mark to Market against this closing price. So there's a ton of activity at that time as these funds try to match the closing price you often see buying a bunch of Futures into 3 p.m. due to rebalancing and duration extension.  Gold features.  Next, we look at gold features and again, all these charts are in the PDF.  New York, dominates gold again. But you can see also a big spike at 8 p.m. New York time. When Shanghai opens Shanghai gold markets. Have taken on increasing importance, but remain less important than us and London markets again, you see Volumes pick up with London, Walks in and then huge spikes when data comes out and at the 10 a.m. gold fix.  The coax close at 1:30 p.m. also sees a large spike in volume. Even though the gold Futures Trading, pit is not a thing anymore. Many systems still marked to the covex closed and so activity, jumps into 1:30 p.m. New York before fizzling into the end of the New York day.  Euro dollar currency spot.  Currency markets, are most active in the London, New York overlap, which runs from 7 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. New York but even inside that 4-Hour window. There are critical moments. Like the economic data at 8:30 a.m. options expiry at 10:00 a.m. and the wmr fix at 11:00 a.m.  Other currencies have important moments throughout the day, too like dollar Yen and the Tokyo fix at 9:55 a.m. Tokyo time which is the highest volume point of the entire 24-hour session for dollar yen.  For a full. Detailed look at critical times of day in FX markets. Check out my first book, The Art of currency Trading.  Well volume and volatility do not always move together. It is generally true to say that volatility and volumes correspond.  For example, a chart of average euro dollar volatility by hour of day will look, very similar to the intraday euro dollar volume pattern.  NYX crude oil futures.  And finally, the last chart in the PDF for this little section shows how oil trades throughout the day.  If you're moving decent volume in US, crude Futures. You should be aware of when liquidity might be a problem.  Selling 5,000 Co which is 9x crude oil. Futures at 225 p.m. will generally be easier than the same trade, a 245 p.m.  There is an insane volume Spike at 2:30 p.m. which is the NX close.  Many participants use trade at settlement or Taz toss orders to guarantee the closing price. On their fill and the hedging of these Taz orders creates a monster volume spike in the minutes, leading up to the Nyx close. If this volume is not balanced, you will sometimes see a huge move at that time. If someone yells what's going on in crude right at 2:30 p.m. just shake your head and say 9x closed, dude. 9x close.  You need to understand whether liquidity is a possible constraint in the products you trade. If it is track liquidity daily using a quantitative measure like bid offer depth and as Traders are market makers for their opinion.  Adapt your tactics and position sizes as necessary to avoid liquidity issues.  if your products are deep and your volume is easily absorbed, life is good, if not be thoughtful and strategic about what time of day you execute and partner with the market maker, you trust,  This concludes the section on liquidity and how activity varies by time of day.  the last facet of Market micro structure, we will cover Because volatility.  Market professionals. Often call, volatility v v is a critical part of a Market's micro structure. It's the dispersion of returns over time. Usually measured as the standard deviation of logarithmic returns in simple English. How much does the thing? Move volatility is not constant or static a currency pair, like dollar. Yen might realize 6% volatility 1 year and 18%. The next Vol is a key concept to understand and you should always know your products. Vol profile. How that is evolved over time and how that might change in the future. A few things you need to know about vol. 1 markets tend to be more volatile around events because equilibrium is a function of all known information, and events. Introduce new information and upset. The equilibrium. For example, overnight V for Aussie dollar, might be 8% on a Normal day and 20% on The Day, The Reserve Bank of Australia meets Facebook trades, with higher, V on earnings day, relative to other days.  2. Volatile, if Equity volatility is exploding higher, it's likely that FX bond market and commodities Vault will go up too. There's often a single Factor driving volatility in capital markets. This can be economic uncertainty, geopolitical drama or something else. Volatility and uncertainty are usually associated.  And 3, it's hard to make money, trading low volume markets, most Traders, make more money when things are moving, 1 of the keys to success in trading is identifying the V regime and adjusting your trading accordingly. You probably won't make money trading breakouts. When the vix is at 11, you probably can't trade me to reversion very well. When the vix is at 80, my p&l is highly. Related to volatility. If you notice a meaningful drop in volatility in something, you trade, consider trading something else or monitor the situation closely and see if your p&l is drifting lower along with v.  To be 100% clear. When people talk about volatility, they usually mean historical volatility, but it's important to understand the 2 different types of vole  Historical volatility is the dispersion of returns in the past. You can measure it different ways, but unless you're an options Trader, I wouldn't worry about where the number comes from. Just know that when people say volatility, they're mostly referring to daily historical or realized volatility the amount. The security has moved around in the past based on daily data.  Implied volatility.  This is the market price for volatility, going forward. This measure is used in options pricing and it's a better proxy for future volatility than historical volatility. The distinction is not important here. Here and for the purposes of an exercise like V adjusted position sizing, it rarely matters which data you use. When it comes to the market. You trade, what is the average daily range for your product?  Daily, average ranges are useful, and it's also good to know. The average hourly range and how that range varies by time of day.  For example, in the PDF, I show how that looks for Apple stock. I also added spy, the S&P 500 ETF to give you some context.  And in that graphic, you can see there's much more volatility on the open and the close and then intraday volatility declines into lunchtime.  Most stocks and Equity, Futures have an intraday volatility profile. Similar to the profile shown in the PDF stock market. Activity is heavy at the open heavy at the close and troughs around lunch.  When thinking about volatility, it's important to understand the current regime but you should also know how volatility has changed. Changed over time.  You can get historical volatility for almost all Financial time series on Bloomberg, refinitiv or the internet.  for example, if you want to know how vs changing in Tesla's stock just Google Tesla historical volatility and have a look,  The absolute numbers are less important than the relative changes. Is the stock becoming more or less volatile, what are the most extreme periods of volatility? What was going on then?  The more you understand both volatility and get comfortable with when it's likely to be high and low, the more likely you will avoid getting punched in the mouth.  If you have the skills and the data,  You should study how, your security trades on big event days. This information can be incredibly useful, if you catch the right side of a move on event day because you can leave limit orders around the extremes and as the market extends or overshoots, you'll take profit. It's nice to be the person selling the spike instead of the 1. If you look, for example, at the distribution of 1 day returns around earnings for Apple, you'll see that a very rarely moves more than 8 to 10%.  The normal curve for 1 day. Percentage returns an apple shows most days are in the minus 2% to plus 4% range. On the other hand, earnings days show 1 day, returns more like minus 6% to plus 7%.  This is important information. If you're long on earnings day, you should modify your parameters relative to a normal day to account for the higher expected volatility.  most Traders would know that a stock is more volatile on earnings day, but when you crunch the data, you get a deeper level of understanding  If you catch a positive earnings move in apple, it makes sense to leave a few limit orders around yesterday's clothes plus 7 to 10%, because that's about as big a move as you can expect based on historical data.  As usual, this type of study gives you Clues, not answers. There could be a day Apple rallies, 20% in 1 day, But this analysis gives you 1 more piece of the puzzle and helps you understand what sort of volatility is likely and what is not.  For 1 stock, 15% moves could be the norm on earnings day for another that figure could be 3%.  The best way to truly understand the volatility of a product or Security is to watch it all day.  The goal is to gain an intimate knowledge of how your Market moves so that you get a feel for what is a big move? What is a logical stop-loss where you should take profit and so on?  1 way to enhance your field for a specific Market is to graph it by hand. Maintain a simple point and figure chart for a few days and you'll be surprised how much your Market feel improves. Especially if you are new to trading or have not traded the product all that much.  Much like keeping score at a baseball game or taking notes in class forces you to pay Keen attention, manually charting a market keeps you in the zone, engaged and connected?  You can also create point and figure charts. In Excel if you're too embarrassed to whip out the graph paper and go old school point and figure is 1 of the original charting methods. It filters out noise and lets you focus on the meaningful changes in price. There is no time element in a point and figure chart. It simply measures price changes of a certain size. This is called the price interval. The x-axis is blank.  In the PDF, I show a point and figure chart I made for Tesla on December 18th 2020. The day Tesla was added to the S&P 500.  The most interesting aspect of the chart is how the x-axis has no meaning, and the chart is stripped of the time Dimension, instead the chart shows any meaningful reversal, however, long it lasts.  Therefore, in this example, the violent final 15 minutes of Tesla trading takes up as much room as the calmer trading that took place throughout the prior 6 Plus hours.  And for contacts. I also include a normal line chart of Tesla that day.  When? You contrast the point and figure to the bar chart. You see how time disappears and volatility is all that matters.  If alternative charting techniques appeal to you, I suggest you investigate Market profile. It is more complicated, but can be another useful and intuitive way of charting and analyzing markets. There are some excellent resources online, including the CME Market profile guide, which is about 300 plus pages in PDF form.  The book Mind Over markets by Dalton Jones and Dalton, turn me on to Market profile, charting more than 10 years ago and I continue to use some of the specific methods from that book to this day. You can play around with it using the mktp function on Bloomberg, which they call Market picture.  Some people think it's stupid to create manual charts but this is not like some muddy clacking away on a manual typewriter, just because he hates technology.  There's a practical value to the tactile practice of closely tracking the market and recording. Its movements in a sheet, or on a piece of paper.  I promise you will learn something from this process and if you don't it doesn't cost you anything more than 1 or 2 pieces of graph paper. You're going to be watching the market anyway.  As you gain experience in your Market, you're familiarity with its micro structure, will improve your execution skills. And it will give you the ability to recognize when the market is deviating from its normal behavior. This ability will prepare you for regime shifts or even allow you to recognize them at transition points. When your Market moves from range to trending or slow to fast expert Traders. Have a detailed understanding of the micro structure of their Market.  This concludes our discussion of micro structure. While micro structure is a topic that requires you to spend some time in the weeds. It is a critical area of study if you want to be a real expert in your Market, you cannot expect your Genius trade idea. Generation skills to carry You also need to be excellent when it comes to execution and risk management.  A solid understanding of micro structure will improve your execution, increase the payout on your good ideas and reduce the cost of your bad ones. Even if you are confident in your knowledge of your Market's micro structure beyond the lookout for changes and stay a breast of developments that might change how your Market behaves.  Simple changes to Market microstructure can often lead to significant changes in your p&l and can turn profitable strategies into Duds.  Now, let's move to the next step in chapter 9. I'll tell you how I stay in touch with the narrative and how that helps me forecast, future moves, and come up with trade ideas,  Chapter 9 understand narrative.  Step 2 towards becoming an expert in your Market.  This chapter will explain how to The study narrative and fundamentals and how to use this knowledge to better forecast short-term Market Direction.  Excellent Traders have an expert level knowledge of the primary narrative and competing sub narratives that drive their Market.  They understand the importance of the story, the market is telling and can see hear and feel when that story is changing, they know what is common knowledge and what is not.  quote, in my whole life, I've known no wise people who didn't read all the time, none zero,  I've gotten paid a lot over the years for reading through the newspapers end quote. Charlie Munger  Once you understand the micro structure of your market and the basics of who moves the market and how and when it moves you should work on your understanding of what moves it and why the what and the why of Market movements are never simple. And as you gain experience, you will realize more and more that many explanations in the financial press. Our way off base.  The Narrative is the story. The Market tells itself to explain movements in price,  like, any good story, there's usually the main plot and then a few subplots. The main Arc is the most important to understand, because markets tend to focus on 1 thing at a time.  But you also need to be ready for the next story as it elbows, today's narrative out of the way.  Here's how Bruce Conor explains it in Market Wizards quote.  1 of the jobs of a good Trader is to imagine alternative scenarios. I try to form many mental pictures of what the world should be like, and wait for 1 of them to be confirmed. You keep trying them on 1 at a time. Inevitably, most of these pictures will turn out to be wrong. That is only a few elements of the picture may prove, correct. But then all of a sudden you'll find that in 1 picture 9 out of 10 elements, click that scenario, then becomes your image of the world reality end quote.  Understanding Nar. Is what most people used to call fundamental analysis, but there's an important Nuance narrative. Analysis is about studying, not just what you think is the story. But more importantly, what story Market players are telling. And what story The Market itself is trying to tell  When it is done, well, narrative. Analysis is a coherent and fluid combination of everchanging, macroeconomic fundamentals, and behavioral factors.  It's often about nailing down the 1, most important story. The Market wants to trade.  For example, 2010 to 2012 was a remarkable period in FX markets. As the market watched, the near implosion of the Euro Zone at the same time as the US Federal Reserve enacted, a series of quantitative easing QE programs.  The Eurozone crisis was bearish Euro and US QE was bearish the dollar during this period euro dollar was known as 2 garbani. Ating that period though was that 1 story or the other clearly dominated most of the time.  The market was either freaking out about the Euro zone or going bananas over us QE.  But it was usually clear which theme was in the driver's seat. This is typical  It's very difficult for markets to hold 2 competing themes in its Collective hive mind at once. So the focus oscillates back and forth instead of going in 2 directions at the same time,  Understanding The Narrative Cycles important, because when you're good at it, it's a critical tool that helps you identify turning points and trends.  You see the psychology and storytelling at work in the market and you can predict where price is going to go.  Surprisingly, The Narrative often turns before price because price has momentum of its own and a propensity to overshoot.  Speculators invested in a trend have confirmation bias and will ignore the changing narrative until the turn in price forces them to pay attention.  Those turning points when the narrative is changed but price. Remains in the old Trend can be some of the most exciting and profitable moments in trading.  In the PDF, I show a stylized view of the typical narrative cycle.  The chart is similar to other cycle analysis, like the Panic Euphoria model or the famous sell sell, sell buy, buy, buy comic by Cal.  It also runs a fair bit with Elliot wave.  Understand the narrative cycle.  It's important to note, when listening to this, that the narrative cycle operates on many times fractals. There are the big macroeconomic narratives, but there are also sometimes much shorter narrative cycles, that can last as little as 24 hours.  Often news or economic data will appear to be important, but then run out of steam, very swiftly as the market pivots back to the main story.  Picture a web of interconnected narratives with 1 or 2 dominating and the rest, all swirling around and buying for attention. The goal is to Determine what stories are driving your market now and what stories will jockey for position and come out ahead in the future?  Traders with more experience, will recognize the stage of the narrative intuitively and will often have a strong sense of when a story is running out of gas as a signposts are often similar at various stages of the narrative cycle.  Ven hunt of Epsilon theory is 1 of the kings of understanding parsing, and forecasting The Narrative or Zeitgeist I strongly recommend you check out his material if you want to excel in narrative analysis.  each stage of every narrative cycle will look and feel familiar in many ways even when the stories themselves will be radically different each time, kind of like a Hollywood movie that follows a standard 3-act Arc but with different characters setting and plot  Let's go through the 7 stages of the narrative cycle as described in the chart in the PDF.  Stage 1 under the radar.  At this point. There's a new narrative forming but very few Traders, have heard about it, some smart independent thinkers, and research-oriented people are talking about it and a few contrarians are putting on the position.  There are usually a few pullbacks as initial Believers have low confidence Traders, testing the waters tend to get bored or jiggled out because the price is not moving their way or they just figure they're too early and don't want to waste time on a narrative. That's not valid.  The Holy Grail of trading of course is to identify below the radar stories that will eventually become important Market narratives. You want to be early to the good stories but if you're too early you need to make sure you don't get bored and give up before the market catches on to the theme.  Stage 2, momentum builds. At this point, the narrative goes a bit viral at least among professionals or experts and price jumps or Falls to reflect the new zeitgeist.  my narrative cycle chart shows a bullish story driving the price of an asset upward, but you can flip the whole thing for about news narrative as the price jumps often on a particular piece of news that suddenly clarifies what was previously still, a foggy narrative people take notice  remember that at every stage of the narrative cycle, there is a dynamic interplay between price and narrative. The story drives a price and the price drives the story and often it's hard to tell, which 1 is causing the movement. For example, say a stock has a good story but it's still in stage 1 of The Narrative cycle, nobody's paying attention.  A fun manager reads, some 3 week old research and decides he loves the story, he starts buying stock and liquidity is poor the price rallies 4%, some stale shorts, stub out and the fund manager keeps buying soon the stocks up 11% over the course of 2 days.  because the stock rallied it appears on a few Radars, many firms and individuals run scans for stocks with unusual volatility in this generates some new interest Traders and investors look it up and Some of them. Like what? They see great story that triggers more buying in this little description. The price is now, feeding the narrative, not the other way around. The narrative already existed 3 weeks ago.  As momentum builds and the stock hits, for example, a 60-day high Trend followers and ctas will start to buy.  This feedback loop where it changes in price influence, investor expectations, which influence the narrative, which influences, the price is a form of reflexivity. Reflexivity is a concept from sociology that was transferred over to finance by George Soros. It's a fancier way of saying circularity or feedback loops  As momentum, buying feeds the narrative and feeds on itself. We enter stage 3, the primary trend.  This phase is where the narrative drum beat takes hold, and there are more and more converts lined up behind the apostles from stage 1.  pullbacks or bought, and the News reinforces the price, which reinforces the trend, which reinforces the buying this stage is often, The most profitable in a strong narrative because stage 3 can last a surprisingly, long time.  Just because a narrative is well known. That does not mean it's exhausted.  Stage 3 involves a lot of hype usually from Financial media and tourists who have joined the party fairly early again just because there's hype. Don't think the story is over the hype. Phase can accompany dramatic price moves as demand outstrips supply for an extended period and the market ignores bad news and doubles down on good news.  Stage 4 for first cracks.  At this stage, some cracks appear, bad news hits that threatens The Narrative, the stories crowded and early entrance. Think, maybe the story is over, so they take some profits, there's a meaningful pullback in price. This pullback shakes off the weaker and more recent buyers. But those that believe in the narrative appear on the bid and the price stabilizes slowly, the importance of the bad news dissipates and price climbs back toward the highs.  Stage 5, the final hype wave. As price breaks through and makes new highs. The Narrative often goes into overdrive. Lungs are emboldened by the price action and a strong feeling of fomo comes over anyone. That's not participating.  Depending on the story, you'll often see the narrative crossover from Financial media to the mainstream media. At this point, if the narrative is interesting and important enough.  Non-experts will join the party retail and macro tourists and this will push price aggressively higher. Stage 5 is usually the most surprising and volatile part of the narrative cycle as sellers step away and buyers. Get desperate in Elliot wave. This is also wave 5 and Elliot wave. Theory warns that wave 5 can be the most impulsive part of a move.  This stage is often characterized by choppy jumpy. Volatile moves, Euphoria and overshooting Trend following systems. Add all the way up.  Stage 6, the peak and the turn, the top and the narrative in price can be a long drawn out process. Or an impulsive overshoot and collapse often. It's like the climax in a movie, with a huge flashy, rip higher. Followed by a rapid reversal. That catches everyone on the wrong side. Excellent Traders will realize there's been a meaningful turn in the narrative here. Even when price continues to make new highs, bad Traders, hate to give up on winning trades and great stories and will fall victim to powerful confirmation bias.  As long as price continues to rise, most Traders will ignore information that goes against the narrative. It is a skill to filter out what matters and what does not, of course. Because powerful bull markets, often climb a wall, a bad news.  Eventually price will start to turn and suddenly bad news from 4 hours to 4 weeks ago, pops back into the mind of the market and everyone's like, what the hell am I doing? Still long up here? Things have changed, then everyone reaches for the sell button at once. And boom. It gaps lower and the top is in  quite often the price rise itself will also Change the supply and demand Dynamic, at this stage, there's a saying that the best cure for high prices is high prices, which means that higher prices ultimately, reduce demand and increase Supply and that eventually leads to lower prices.  For example, when the price of oil Rises or Falls gradually consumer and producer Behavior does not change much on the other hand, when the price of oil explodes higher from $50 to $120, we get dated in 2008. Producers rush to bring on new Supply and consumers simultaneously. Cut their demand because they can't afford to fill up their SUVs. They drive less  these shifts in supply and demand are not instantaneous so price can continue to rise. Even as new Supply Works its way into the system and demand disappears.  Then suddenly the new Supply runs into falling demand and prices whoosh lower.  Furthermore, depending on the market the higher price can also have other macroeconomic impacts that will lead to lower price. In the future.  For example, a rise in the Euro might lead to more accommodative ECB policy or a huge ramp up. In Tesla stock, might spur Elon Musk to sell stock in a secondary offering.  Be sure to understand what price levels in your Market might lead to major or nonlinear changes in Supply or demand.  If you're an expert in your market and keenly attuned, to its driving narrative, you'll recognize moments when the story has changed. But price is not yet paying attention. Those can be some of the juiciest setups in finance.  These topics can be false Breaks by highs that happen in a Flash or drawn out periods of distribution that Trace out, triple quintuple or even septuple tops before finally, capitulating lower  When you see a turn in the narrative, you can use your knowledge of technical reversal patterns to help align your strategy with your tactics. That is you can turn bearish near the highs due to a change in the narrative and find high leverage setups that allow you to test your theory. That the narrative is turned without risking a ton, if you're wrong.  Stage 7, the end.  As a narrative expires, people lose interest and only those with bad discipline. Hang on.  Shorts Hammer the price down and long slowly but surely get out Market. Themes are like fashion trends. The Market's interest is fickle and limited people get bored of a theme and they move on sometimes. This will be justified by fundamentals and sometimes it will simply be that a sexier more interesting theme came along.  That is the narrative cycle, I'm describing something clean and visible. But the tricky part is that these Cycles are anything but clean and are only easy to see in hindsight.  As you get experience, though, you'll start to see these Cycles play out in real time and will learn to anticipate and act before the cycle moves to its next stage.  Remember this is not about long-term investing, it's about understanding the current equilibrium. So that as new information arrives, you can capitalize. If you know, where you are in the story and understand current, positioning, you'll have an edge as a cycle. Moves from stage to Stage. These narrative Cycles can last hours days or weeks.  Understand the stories the market is telling itself and learn to identify when the market is falling in or out of love with a narrative.  Let's look at a very simple example of how understanding The Narrative can help you when news comes out. You've been trading the stock of a hydrogen-powered truck manufacturer for a while and has been in a steady uptrend. The market has attached to huge premium to electric and autonomous vehicle stocks and the stock you trade benefits from the halo effect of Tesla.  The main narrative is that autonomous vehicles, have, massive upside, and almost any market cap can be justified.  With this stock, there's a bearish counter narrative humming in the background. That story is that the company has not yet delivered, a single working truck to any customer and behind the scenes, there's Strife inside the company as the founder is viewed by some as a classic Visionary entrepreneur and by others as a marketing, genius, with no technical skill,  In contrast to Tesla, which has produced thousands of working automobiles, The Narrative of the off, the rails. Visionary founder has more potential weight because a company has yet to prove itself capable  A famous short seller comes out with a detailed description of exactly how the founder of the company has used marketing and outright deception to convince people of the company's future success. Despite repeated product failures behind the scenes.  Short sellers come out with reports like this all the time. Some are credible. Some are not some hit the stock on the opening and it rallies back by the end of the day, some are the start of a long slow march to zero. How do you decide what to do?  Obviously, the first thing you do is read the report, you're already an expert on the stock and the narratives that drive it. In this case, you know, the worries about the founder. I've been whispered for a while and therefore, this short sellers report will have more Force than if a comparable report was issued on, say, Tesla.  you sell the stock short on the open and as far as the stock, which opened down 7%, closes down 20%,  Your expert in the stock. So you know, the Market's prior short position has been nearly eliminated over the course of the recent violent uptrend.  You know, from all your reading that the high-profile Bears mostly gave up a few months ago, the chart is a perfect Island reversal day as a stock. Got up to make a new all-time high the day before. The short sellers report came out.  Your stop loss is clear. If the stock goes back above today's open, something is wrong with the idea and you're out.  The first price a security trades after news comes out is called the news pivot. These are critical price points, going forward news, pivots become significant reference points in the mind of the market. And if price, subsequently recaptures, the news pivot, it often means that you Either a, the news wasn't all that important or B, larger medium, and long-term players are using the news as a liquidity event to go the other way.  if bad news comes out and your stock goes back above the news pivot, watch out, we'll talk more about news pivots in chapter 10,  So now you have abrupt flip from bullish, narrative to bearish narrative, large long position almost no shorts textbook Island reversal news, pivot held and stock closed on the lows.  Give it all this, you figure. This is a multi-day trade, today's Tuesday. Knowing that historically, the big impulsive moves in the stock lasts an average of 3 days and considering you don't like to take positions over the weekend. You set your stop-loss at the news, pivot plus 1% and plan to take back the short either. Friday morning, or after another, 15% drop  Naturally you closely Follow The Narrative from here too. And try to assess whether the company's response is to the short sellers report. A credible or maybe just make things worse.  Whether it's a single stock or macroeconomic narrative, you follow. The idea is the same. You must understand the current equilibrium as well as anyone else does. And then when new information comes in or the narrative starts to turn, you're on it.  Here's how to be an expert on narrative.  1 read like a fiend with a focus on quality seek out analysis. Thought processes, trade, ideas event, previews and unique, insights avoid long-term forecasts Market summaries, and Recaps.  You need to Find forward-looking analysis that contains useful, non- duplicative, information, and ideas, and incorporate that information and Analysis into your own process.  There's so much information available. Now, filtering has become an important skill. You can waste your whole day, reading bearish, NASDAQ tweets and pointless Market Recaps, if you're not selective, It's important to curate a good list of reading and news sources. Then keep refining it and improving it over time.  Learn who is good in your market and get your hands on their write-ups.  As you gain experience as a Trader, learn which names are worth reading. And which ones are not, do not simply. Take everything you read at face value. You can find the most intelligent Perma analysis from various funds. But what value does that analysis have? If the writer has been bearish for 10 years and never changes his View?  Consider what you are reading but also who wrote it.  Reading obviously teaches, you different thought, processes and directly yields new information. It also gives you a sense of the Zeitgeist, what narratives are dominant right now,  understanding the dominant narrative and where your Market stands in the narrative cycle are 2, important skills.  2, develop a network to form a strong Network. You need to both give and receive information and ideas. Try to find peers and mentors either within your organization or online. No, human being can scour all the information available the way to form a strong network is by giving not, by asking for information.  Post interesting comments in a message board, if you work at a bank blast, your best ideas to clients. If you trade from home, post your trades on a bulletin board or on Twitter.  To build a network, be authentic and give more than you take.  Building a network. Takes a long time, you will not get much traction at first because nobody knows you and nobody cares what the new guy has to say once in a. While an idea you send out into the universe, might get some feedback.  Over time, you'll connect to a few people that a few more, but it's exponential if you work hard at it and find a way to authentically, connect to people after maybe 10 years, you'll have a huge network of followers or contacts.  To build a network. Play the long game. It can't be done overnight.  Building a network. Is hard frustrating work. Gains are tiny at first. But Network effects, scale geometrically, the eventual benefits are tremendous.  3, study the central banks. If you're a macro Trader, this is obviously key, but even if you trade single name, stocks, you should still understand what's going on with the major central banks. The fed, the ecv, the boj  overall Global liquidity is the number 1 Factor driving all Global asset prices, much of the time and you need to have a decent sense of what is happening on that front.  Central banks beaches are boring, but necessary material for good Traders.  if you trade interest rates or FX, you should read every Central Bank speech, for the countries, you trade,  A huge part of the narrative in rates and FX is driven by the central banks and you should know which Central Bankers matter, what their bias is, how their views have evolved, and what they think right now.  You don't need to forecast. What the central banks are going to do. You have to understand the current environment and what any future actions mean.  Some of the best trades come from Simply preparing for a central bank meeting by reading all the available materials and then going into the event with zero position.  Then you react to the news with a solid and complete understanding of what the new information means and how it will affect prices.  The only way you can do this is by reading and studying beforehand.  If you trade macro each fomc and ECB meeting is a major example. Are you going to study for a few days in advance or just cram a few Bank previews, the morning of and hope for the best?  Even if you specialize in, for example, Tesla or crude oil, you still need to understand the FED because its actions. And statements are a major input into the price of those assets.  4. Find the subject matter experts, who's the best analysts in your Market? Can you get your hands on their writing?  Much of the best Wall Street analysis. Can be found. On the line and you can follow some of the best minds and Finance on Twitter.  as you read, more and more about your domain, you'll start to pick up on who is smart, who is biased, who is useless and who to follow  this takes time.  Also talk to people go online and ask people on Reddit or on Twitter for example who's the best FX analysts out there? Who's a must follow Etc.  As I mentioned earlier, building a curated list of experts to read and follow is an important part of your effort in understanding the narrative.  How to understand the narrative is fairly easy for me to explain, but requires significant time and effort from you. You'll notice over time that your ability to read the story, the market is telling gets better and better soon. You'll start to get a sense of what is about to happen before it happens.  The Narrative is the internal story of your Market, but outside your Market, there are hundreds of Other Stories, being told in other markets and each of those stories has some loose or possibly tight. Connection to your Market.  Global growth expectations, for example, will impact Canadian growth, expectations, and that will impact Bank of Canada policy, and the narrative around Canadian interest rates and the Canadian dollar.  At the same time, Global growth expectations will influence demand forecasts for copper and the price of copper itself.  Therefore 1 might expect there to be a correlation between copper and the Canadian dollar both driven by a third variable, Global growth expectations.  There are literally hundreds of these connections. All permeating, the impossibly complex system that is the global economy and Global markets. These connections, create a huge Matrix of correlations between markets and fortunately for Traders many of the correlations operate with various leads and lags, so copper might move right now and then CAD moves 2 hours later when lead lag trading works. It can feel like you've been given the answers to the test.  Drivers and C. Ists.  What drives a product or security you trade? What drivers matter for your particular strategy. This question can be fairly easy to answer for some Traders and extremely difficult for others. For example, if you think of yourself as a global macro Trader and your focus is on interest rate products, the answer is fairly easy growth inflation, and Global monetary policy are the main drivers, you need to worry about  We need to know the drivers. The catalysts are pretty obvious for the Trader concerned with growth inflation and monetary policy. The catalysts are usually economic data and Central Bank meetings.  This is all theory, of course, and is easy on paper, but hard in real life. While a strong US economic data point should be a catalyst for a higher dollar. For example, there are plenty of days when data comes in strong and the dollar goes down.  There are many types of Market Catalyst. Here's a list of some biggies working from most macro to least.  1 in. International geopolitics.  for example, trade Wars, G20 Summit, Global pandemic OPEC meeting, military conflict, 2 domestic politics,  Elections. Coups scandals passage of new laws, Court decisions, 3 Central Bank action or speeches.  4 economic data, 5 company news earnings analysts, upgrades downgrades Personnel changes, specially, CEO or CFO capital structure dividends BuyBacks secondary issuance.  6 Catalyst in a correlated Market.  7, technical breakout 8 time of day week or month.  The first 5 are easy to understand. If you're an expert in your Market, you'll know upcoming events in each of those 5 categories that might impact your Trading.  The bare minimum for every professional Trader is to know, all the economic and market events. That could impact the Securities they trade. When an economic number is coming out, you should know in advance and you should be ready. If your stock reports earnings tomorrow morning, you should know that you should be prepared with a list of scenarios so that the second the news hits you can react intelligently.  If you're the person on a trading floor yelling, is this bullish or bearish? When news comes out,  you are not yet an alpha Trader.  You must be properly prepared. Have an expert level of knowledge and understand the narrative. Then when important news comes out, you can react quickly and take massive determined action  Worse than the trader. That does not know of news is bullish or bearish. For a particular Market is a Trader that's not even aware of a scheduled release.  I've heard Traders yell. Whoa, what just happened to dollar Yen after a judge's 15 points, higher on an economic release like consumer confidence? They didn't even know the number was coming out. That's not good.  Take time to understand the fundamental and Technical drivers of your particular. Security.  Item 6 in that list, I just went through Catalyst, in a correlated Market, relates to the idea of lead lag and correlation. For example, if your long dollar Canada and the pair has been trading within 80% negative correlation to crude oil over the past 12 months, you should be aware. If there's an OPEC meeting coming up OPEC meetings, often lead to large changes in the price of oil. And as such can lead to large changes in dollar Canada,  if you want to be an expert in dollar Canada, you should read everything. You can about that upcoming OPEC meeting  If you're long City Bank stock and JP Morgan reports tonight, you should be ready and know what to expect, you should know, not just Market expectation, for JP Morgan's numbers but also whether or not City Bank tends to move in sympathy with JPM on JPM earnings day.  Understanding these ins and outs of how things trade and move is key.  I'll discuss this in more detail shortly in the section on Cross Market correlation Item 7 on my list was technical breakout that's important but don't overestimate the importance of every tech level that you see. There's always another level nearby and not every break of a 10-day high or low or trend line or Fibonacci level has meaning.  If you read about your market and talk to and follow other Traders, you'll start to get a sense for what are the big levels.  A big level isn't a level that's important to you. It's a level that's important to the market. This is a big distinction. You need to have your own views and thoughts, but Alpha Traders are also Inside the Mind of the market and know what matters most to the market as a whole.  This concept is best captured by keen's beauty contest analogy. From the general theory of employment interest and money 1936.  Keen's asks, us to imagine a newspaper which holds a contest where readers are rewarded for choosing which contestant will be chosen by the most other readers.  The task is not to choose the most beautiful woman. But instead to choose the woman, others think is most beautiful. Sometimes that's the same woman but not always.  Participants in complex, multiplayer games with incomplete information, like trading poker, and Bridge play, a superior metagame where they understand, not just their own strategy and preferences but also the strategy and preferences of the other players.  If everyone you talk to is talking about the 122 level and 10 year bond features, you should have that level marked on your charts and you should closely observe how the contract trades around there.  The market converging to the opinion that a particular level is important. Does not happen all that often. But when it does, you should pay attention. If that level breaks, the price action afterwards has important implications for the future, a key level, that breaks and follows through is indicative of a trending Market, while a false break of a level, Everyone's Watching also known as a slingshot reversal is 1 of the best indicators for Trend reversal. Strong uptrends, hold above major support, and they break through major resistance.  Always monitor how your Market behaves at important levels. If a market has been trending and everyone's focused on a particular pullback level that level should hold. If it does not, this may signal the trend is out of gas.  The final Catalyst, in my list was item 8, time of day week or month often, you'll notice that Trends exhaust themselves and turn around at the end of the day, week or month.  For example, in months where the US Stock Market is up 3% or more Sterling dollar frequently rallies into month, end and sells off the first week of the new month. There's a reason for that.  in the PDF, I showed a chart of how Sterling trades around the turn of the month, at the end of the months, where US, Stocks, rallied, 3%, or more,  This is caused by large hedging by Foreign asset managers at month end. Which climaxes at 4 p.m. London time on the last day of the month, note that this impact was huge for Um 2012 to 2021 but has dissipated somewhat since then.  The point of this little section is not to tell you how FX trades on the last day of the month though. If you trade FX, you should know this. It's to show a good example of how time of day week or month can impact price. In this case, the month-end affect determines the direction of the dollar into month end, and then the effect unwinds due to mean reversion in the first week of the following month.  The reason price very often turns at the end of a day week or month, is that many orders in the market are time that way.  A large CTA that needs to buy a million shares of a company will start its vwap at the open and end it at the close.  A large corporation that needs to buy 1 billion. Canada will tell the bank doing the trade to get it done. By the end of the day,  Month. And is a time when many real money investors rebalance so they will complete all their activity. By the end of the day, on the last day of the month and so on.  very, Large orders can often dominate the supply, demand profile of an asset for a short period, most large order, executions take place during the most liquid period of the day.  When that period draws to a close, it's reasonable to assume the supply demand profile for the asset might change. Mean reversion kicks in as a large order is done and the market drifts back toward equilibrium. In other words with the big buyer out of the way, the price can drip lower.  in stocks, there are patterns around the start and end of the month and around options expiring, triple witching Etc,  The takeaway here, is that Trends often mean revert. At the turn of the week, the turn of the month or another key time such as options, expiry. If you're looking to fade a strong Trend, these are often good moments to take a shot. This is an example of something. I think it's important to remember.  There does not have to be an obvious, exogenous Catalyst for every Market move reversal Peak or bottom.  we need to discuss a Great idea with someone and they say, okay, sure about what's the Catalyst? It's okay to say, I don't know.  Not every move has a logical macro Catalyst Market, catalysts are often endogenous as supply and demand change for reasons. Unrelated to macro or fundamentals.  endogenous means having an internal cause or origin, not attributable to any external Factor, the opposite of exogenous  a market high can happen simply because the last buyer bought and the market has run out of buyers or because a single huge buyer is done by as in the Sterling example above  When there are suddenly no buyers in the market, this is called a buyer's strike, a market that was grinding higher for days. Can often plummet suddenly the Catalyst for a sell-off, after an aggressive uptrend or ramp higher can sometimes simply be no more buyers.  Cross Market correlation.  and, Important driver or Catalyst for your Market can be activity and moves in another security or asset class. Try to identify how price action in other markets, may send clues about your Market to take an obvious example. If gold spikes twenty 5 dollars in 3, minutes and Silver's unchanged, would you rather be long or short silver? Probably long.  While correlated products tend to move in sympathy with 1 another, there are usually leads and lags if Apple rips higher on good product launch news can you find the sympathy plays before other Traders do display makers and semiconductor stocks might benefit too for example.  This style of trading where you follow many markets and try to determine which ones are potentially leading or lagging is called intermarket cross Market or lead lag analysis.  This type of analysis. Can give you a significant Edge, though. It has become mainstream in recent years and does not have the edge it once did.  I use cross. Market analysis, all day, every day. It's a central pillar of my trading process. If I'm trading dollar Canada, I know all the products that are correlated with dollar Canada. For example, oil, US Canada interest rate. Differentials Canadian equities copper gold Etc. And I watched them all closely. I do this by setting up a series of separate charts which overlay the main asset. In this case dollar Canada with the correlated variables on top,  I show a couple of examples of this in the PDF,  You can see in 1 of the charts, the remarkable and steady relationship between us equities and the Canadian dollar in the year 2020.  Often especially periods of high volatility and uncertainty, correlations rise and everything seems to depend on risk appetite and not much else with Co 19 raging for most of 2020. This was 1 of those periods.  However, note that S&P futures, often move before the Canadian dollar, providing some excellent signals for FX. Illustrators.  Another chart I show in the PDF is the Australian dollar versus copper futures.  Australia is heavily reliant on Chinese growth and commodity prices because of significant proportion of its GDP comes from the production and export of Commodities. Therefore there's a strong connection between the price of copper and the Australian dollar.  In July 2020. You can see how copper moved before the Aussie dollar providing an excellent bullish signal for the currency.  and in the PDF, there's 1 more example where I look at S&P futures, the US Stock Market against Equity volatility as denoted by the vix  I inverted the vix for the overlay because the standard relationship is that when stocks go down volatility and the vix go up and vice versa of course.  Generally, when stocks rise volatility Falls, when stocks fall a volatility Rises, this is true almost all the time because investors buy puts to protect them. Elves as markets fall in a normal rising market. Investors sell calls to take profit earn income and monetize. Gains. When volatility Rises as stocks rise, it can be a warning sign telling you, that something weird is going on.  Any strange behavior in markets or change in reaction, function should always piqued your interest. Whenever something weird happens in the market. Go on high alert and investigate. Try to find out. Why, in the chart in the PDF volatility was Rising, even as stocks Rose in September 2020, because a large institutional player and heard of retail investors were going nuts, buying calls,  This is behavior. You see in bubbly and overhyped environments. Can you guess what stocks did next?  The follow-up charts in the PDF and stocks dumped.  It's a textbook case of lead like trading the rise in. The Vicks said to clear and strong signal that something strange was going on. And the rally in the stock market was highly suspect. This is not hindsight. I wrote about it at the time before stomp stomped.  The big stalks up scenario was 1 of many factors that went into my decision to turn bear. Stalks on September 1st 2020.  That was a good trade.  Each bit of information adds to the last and eventually you have enough. Building blocks stacked up. It results in a solid trade idea.  The more you understand your Market, the better feel you'll get over time as to what it means when divergences build between primary and correlated markets.  I always feel more confident putting on a trade, if the most important correlated variables are stable or moving in my direction,  For example, if I have a strong view that the Canadian dollar is set to Rally based on my economic and technical analysis, but then I see oils just dropped 2 dollars in the past 30 minutes. I'll probably wait on my cat execution.  In contrast, if I'm bullish Canada and planning to get long and then notice crude rallying hard. I'll hurry up and get the train on. If I'm about to go short Netflix, but then see Disney and Google, rip higher, a, hold off, and wait for Disney and Google to stabilize. Or for Netflix to catch up before I go short and so on.  Correlated variables, give you a hint as to where your product is going, but not the answer.  As I said earlier, these cross Market relationships often exists because there is a third variable driving to correlated products. For example, gold, in the US dollar have a common driver us real interest rates. If the world thinks the FED is going to do more quantitative easing and push real rates lower you might see that reflected in higher gold first and then a lower dollar shortly after  all other things being equal, lower real rates means stronger, gold and a weaker dollar, but these markets will not all move in perfect sync. Rates in Gold, might be on the move, but a big buyer of US Dollars. May be in the market. So the dollar doesn't move at first. Then when the buyer of dollars is done the dollar catches up Lead lag Traders, look at the entire board and hunt for an overall pattern then they find particular asset prices. That don't make sense and try to get on board before those out of line assets, move back into line  Think of the markets as 1, huge interconnected organism where information influences many assets at once. But not all at the exact same time if a market moves and that market is correlated to yours. Pay attention. What does it mean?  You can use common sense to come up with a list of correlated markets, fairly easily when you read articles about your Market, do they mention other assets? You'll often see a headline like Australian dollar Rises on China growth optimism.  This tells you someone out there is equating Aussie with Chinese growth. What are some other proxies for Chinese growth that iron ore or the Shanghai Composite Index fxi which is the China a-shares ETF, copper BHP FCX mining stocks Etc  Every in. Individual security or Market is part of a universe of other Securities and markets and they all orbit and influence 1, another in the PDF, I have a grid of examples of correlations to get you started.  If you have Bloomberg, you can play around with the Corr and cfnd functions to find things that are correlated to your Market. But it's more useful to use logic rather than data mining.  Start with things that should logically be correlated to your market, then calculate the correlation to see if your guesses are correct.  Use correlation of daily changes, not correlation of levels when calculating correlation.  You can also go to websites like Market topology, calm and mess around with their correlation tools. Just remember to use a logic filter because you can data mine, all kinds of nonsensical correlations if you try hard enough,  Eventually, as you approach expert level in your product slowly Branch out from your market and learn more about a small list of correlated Market.  for example, over many years of trading currencies, I have accumulated a ton of knowledge about markets outside of, but correlated to FX  This knowledge helps me better, understand and trade the currency Market.  For example, if you trade dollar Canada, it's good to know what the Tas order type is in the oil Market because oil is correlated to Dollar Canada. It's good to know how volumes and volatility are distributed throughout the day in the oil Market too. It's helpful to know when KNX crude closest and so on. But if you're going to trade dollar Canada, first, you need to be a dollar candidate expert later in your career go, learn the markets that orbit your main area of expertise.  Seek to understand any Market that is correlated to yours search for the most stable, and logical correlations and ignore transitory or nonsensical correlations. Even if they look statistically strong,  A full discussion of lead, like trading could fill an entire book, a study the behavior of correlated. Markets and watch how correlations change over time. Correlations are not static. Sometimes stocks and bonds go up and down together, sometimes they're inversely correlated. Sometimes stocks go up and down with the dollar sometimes, they're inversely correlated.  Closely follow a small list of markets correlated to your primary market and you'll slowly get a feel for how markets move together even as they do not move in perfect sync.  Lead lag is part art and part science. So you should expect that it will take a few years to get a feel for it. Once you do, you will sometimes feel like you can tell what's going to happen before it happens. As you pick up on a strongly correlated leading variable that drives your market for a little while regimes, where lead lag works. Well, can be highly satisfying and profitable trading periods.  Lead lag and correlation trading is not the Holy Grail. It's a popular systematic strategy. Therefore, much of the edge is now captured by computers.  It's an input into a good discretionary trading process. Not an entire discretionary trading process.  When you understand the story that drives your market, and you understand the catalysts and drivers, that move prices, you're ready to start trading.  But where do trade ideas come from? That's probably the number 1 question. I'm asked by new Traders. How do you come up with ideas? Where do you start? What is the process?  Chapter 12 is called bringing it all together, and that's where I'll take you from. Start to finish from trade idea, to execution, to take profit to post trade analysis.  But before we can bring it all together, we need to cover a few more topics. Next up, the importance of technical analysis sentiment and positioning  before we get started on chapter 10, I just want to let you know, if you want to read my thoughts every single day, including thoughts about trading Global macro and What I'm doing on any given day, subscribe to am FX. You can go to Spectre markets.com to sign up.  All right, and now it's time for chapter 10. I understand technicals sentiment, and positioning.  Step 3 towards becoming an expert in your Market.  Success at any complex game puzzle or battle relies on both intelligent strategy and effective tactics.  Tactics are just as important as strategy yet are often overlooked. This chapter explains technical analysis, sentiment and positioning, and shows how Superior understanding of these subjects will give you a significant tactical Edge.  To be clear when it comes to trading, strategy means coming up with trade ideas. And tactics means how you execute and Implement those ideas.  Nearly all my trade ideas start from either micro structure. Or narrative, they never come from looking at a chart or, from any form of technical analysis, and I never put on a trade purely because of sentiment or positioning my highest, conviction trades. Generally have multiple inputs, but they always start with fundamentals or micro structure and then get refined streamlined or filtered out by other factors.  I use technical analysis, sentiment and positioning as timing tools but not as trade selection tools, my thinking, on this, as evolved over the years partly because markets, have evolved. But also, because I've seen enough evidence to conclude that technical analysis is not a source of alpha or Edge that is charts are not a good forecasting tool.  There's a pretty tall pile of research to back this up. I'll give you a quick rundown of 1 paper, called our random strategies more successful than technical ones. They analyze 4 popular technical strategies RSI macd. Mean reversion and momentum.  They ran them against 4, major stock markets, USA, Germany, Italy, and the UK, and compared the results to a strategy that shows entry and exit levels 100% randomly. Here's their conclusion.  Our main result, which is independent of the market considered is that standard trading strategies and their algorithms based on the history of the time series. Although have occasionally the chance to be successful inside small temporal windows on a large temporal scale performance on average, not better than the purely random strategy, which on the other hand is also much less volatile.  In this respect, for the individual Trader, a purely random strategy represents a Costless alternative to expensive professional financial consulting.  being at the same time, also much less risky if compared to the other trading strategies end quote,  There are entire books that go through all the major technical patterns and back test them. And come to the same result. Technical analysis is not a good forecasting tool.  I explained my philosophy on technical analysis when I discussed over Reliance on simple indicators and aoenia.  I want to make it clear, though. I use technical analysis in my trading every day. I just don't use it to predict markets.  Technical analysis gives you an important set of tactical execution and risk management tools. It does not help you forecast Market Direction. Good Traders are quick to admit when they are wrong, they make leverage asymmetric bets, technical analysis can help you do these things better and provide strong and clear signals of when it's time to give up on a bad idea or take profit on a good 1.  Believe it or not, the exact technical indicators, you choose are not all that important.  The mathematics and concept behind most technical indicators are similar RSI macd. And oscillators, I'll give you a similar feel for Trend and momentum Simple trend lines, plus support, and resistance work just as well as more complicated or convoluted methods. The more esoteric you get with your technical analysis. The more likely you are to find yourself wasting time in the weeds. Keep it simple. Remember, Alpha Traders do not use technical analysis to predict the market. They use it to optimize execution and risk management.  Here are some texts. I look at  significant reference points are srps are levels that are likely to feature prominently in the mind of the market. These are levels and majority of Market players view, as important,  As is the case, in keen's beauty contest analogy. It's important to know, not just what you think is important but what others think is important here are some standard significant reference points.  News pivots.  A news pivot is the last trade in the market before important Market. Moving news comes out. I find that news pivots are the Most powerful reference points in trading, you should be aware of all news pivots in your markets. If Apple's at 100 when good news comes out in the first trade. After the news is 103, the Gap is 100 103 with the news pivot 100 marking the bottom of the gap.  Remember that price is a momentary equilibrium determined by the sum of all known information in the universe, when new information, appears the market frantically, tries to find the corresponding new equilibrium. If the market believes the news to be meaningful, it should abandon the old equilibrium from before the news came out, that is the news pivot and find a new 1.  A return to or through the newspaper is important information. It tells you the market has rejected, the news and the attempt to find a new equilibrium and reverted back to its old happy place.  When news comes out the market fumbles around in the dark as it tries to find a new balance between supply and demand buyers and sellers of various time frames. Also, for position, the first price that trades after news comes out is also a significant reference point going forward.  In the PDF, I show an example of a news pivot and price Gap using hyg which is the high yield ETF in the chart. I show of hyg, the High Yield Corporate Bond ETF. You can see that on the day, the FED announced their intention to buy high yield bonds hyg. Gapped massively higher. It closed just below 78 the day before then open at 82, the day of the announcement. Therefore the news pivot, the price. Before the news is 78 and the other side of the Gap is 82. These are both significant reference points going forward.  In the weeks that followed hyg closed, the Gap and retested, the News pivot, the newspaper, held perfectly and hyg, never fell back below 78, despite 4 Separate tests.  astute traders of hyg would be aware of the closing level before the feds announcement and would also be aware that At that level is likely to be massive support.  A simple strategy of buying just above the news, pivot with the stop below. The news pivot would have worked perfectly.  Always take note of the level of any Market. You trade going into a major event. This level is likely to be a significant reference point, going forward.  Support and resistance.  The next type of significant reference point to identify is simple support and resistance if a Stock's in a downtrend, but it starts to build a base and bounces off. 80 3 times, you should take note of this. The beauty of support and resistance are their Simplicity. They are easy to identify and their existence is logical because often they are simple reflection of Supply, or demand at a particular level.  A patient. Medium-term buyer in a market, might decide to work a massive bid at $80 in a stock that massive bid will be visible. As the price repeatedly trades at 80 but fails to break through that level.  Support and resistance. In your Market can be identified, simply by eyeballing both an hourly and a daily chart. Here's what to look for.  1 any top side or downside level that held more than once, this can often be a band, not an exact level. For example, you might see a series of lows and gold at 1914, 1908 and 1904.  Don't use false Precision. We need to determine significant reference points. A band of support often makes more sense than trying to identify an exact level.  2. Any level that represents a major high or low for your product 60-day low. 1 year low Etc  3 broken resistance or support when a major support breaks, expect that level to become important resistance in future.  And 4. Major round numbers. These do not always matter. But remember how humans love round numbers?  In the PDF, I show a sterling dollar chart and you can see strong support formed at 1:30 figure. 25. It's marked with ones and the important swing High just below 135 marked with 2. Then note how the old support became resistance once it broke marked as number 3  Also note that a round number 13000 is the critical pivot on the chart.  If your Market's been in a nice uptrend for a few weeks and pulls back to Major support bounces weekly off it, then breaks through the support, that's a warning sign. The trend has lost its power as it fails to hold above the levels that matter.  Remember strong uptrends? Hold major, support. Strong downtrends. Stay below. Major resistance.  The next chart in the PDF is a chart of gold from the summer of 2020 and there's a major support at 1910 before. And after the number 1 on the chart, there are 5 separate tests and holds of 1910,  In this chart, I also show volume bars below the price because volume can be an additional layer of useful information. You can see there's a huge volume Spike when gold tested the key 1910 support level in late August. This tells you that aggressive selling was absorbed and therefore, demand was significant at 1910.  Successful holds of major support on high. Volume are super bullish.  High volumes reinforce the importance of a support or resistance level or can signal that it has been decisively broken.  At the points. Mark 2 on the chart, you can see another huge volume surge but this time gold slices through the bottom of an important triangle and through the critical 1910 level all at once.  High volumes provide signal confirmation for technical patterns.  And the next chart in the PDF shows, another example of a massive volume Spike at a turning point. This chart of your Norway shows, a monster volume Spike on the very last day of August 2020 that marked the ding-dong low in the pair.  Most likely this was a huge rebalancing flow.  Many FX rebalancing flows. Coincide with 4 p.m. London time on the last day of the month. And that's the timing of the big volume bar. If you squint, you can also see the second largest, volume bar, coincides with an important low in mid June,  Remember that because support and resistance are simple and not subject to much interpretation. Most people in the market will be monitoring roughly the same support and resistance levels.  Therefore, you need to think about the meta game and leave your stops far enough below support or above resistance. That you're not dinged by a weak stop-loss. Run that takes out an obvious level.  It's often best to place. Your stop loss about a half day's range, below a major level to avoid any noisy whip saws around that point.  And just a reminder as discussed in the chat drone micro structure, you should know what 1 day's range is in your product on average and at the extremes, this is the most important measure of volatility for short-term Traders.  If all, you know about technical analysis is news pivots support and resistance, you know, Enough to function as a competent Trader.  I'll now go through a few more indicators I use. But like I said, indicator selection is somewhat arbitrary and not, especially important. If RSI make sense to you use them, if you prefer macd. Great. Your success or failure in trading will not be determined by the technical indicators. You choose. And it will most certainly not be determined by, which parameters? You choose for those indicators.  If you've never read any technical analysis, books, or websites, my suggestion is that you either take 10 or 15 hours to read a bunch of technical analysis, websites and watch YouTube videos about tax or read 2, or 3, good books on technical analysis, like John Murphy's or Steve Nissan's book.  Another great resource is the 6-part market profile study. Guide from the CME. You can Google it and find the PDF free online Market. Profile is a bit esoteric, but I find it logical and easy to understand.  Your intention while reading. About technical analysis is to find 2 to 5 simple indicators or patterns that you like use these as your primary risk management and Market screening tools. Then you can add a few more over time. You don't need 74 different, technical indicators. We need to use tax to manage risk and improve execution tactics running 14, spreadsheets screening for every technical indicator ever invented is a waste of time. Keep it simple.  Make sure you allocate enough, time to strategy coming up with trade ideas and tactics entry, stop loss, Etc.  Many Traders, find it as more fun to come up with trade ideas and do not allocate enough resources to the tactics of extracting as much money as possible from those ideas. You cannot win without good strategy and solid tactics.  Symmetry.  Another setup I look for in financial markets is symmetry. It is logical that a quasi natural system like Financial Market. Would often produce symmetrical patterns.  Furthermore, since volatility tends to be steady in many markets for much of the time, it makes sense, that moves, whether they be up, or down, would tend to be of approximately the same size if something, just rallied 5% in 3 months, its intuitive and logical that it could fall 5% in 3 months but less intuitive or logical than it might fall 12% in 1 month.  Next in the PDF are 2 examples of symmetry that I found useful in September 2020.  The first was dollar Canada.  The co 19 crisis triggered, a massive shortage of dollars as the market scrambled for liquidity and freaked out about the dramatic drop in the stock market.  This push dollar CAD from 12952 to 14669 in Just 2 months.  Then the FED launched. An epic QE bazooka and stocks quickly stabilized.  This helped dollar CAD form a top and eventually, the pair dropped all the way back down to within 30. Tips of where it started 12952. Check out the chart in the PDF. It is a thing of beauty. You can see how dollar Canada, rallied 17.2. Big figures then sold off 16.8 big figures just about perfect symmetry. Pretty amazing.  Once it completed that symmetrical roundtrip dollar CAD held in the mid 129s and that was an excellent buying opportunity. This is not hindsight. I use the Symmetry as 1 of several reasons to recommend a dollar CAD long at the time. The next chart is a thing of absolute Beauty. It shows dollar cnh dollar, China as it, followed a perfect m-shaped, pattern and respected, both price and time symmetry.  Each leg of the M was about 95 days with the first 2. Exactly 999 days. And the last 292 and 97 days. The first rally matched, the ultimate sell-off, just about perfectly and the v in the middle of the M. Displayed just about perfect symmetry too. When an asset is completed, Asymmetrical pattern, you should be on high alert for a reversal.  Furthermore, when trading options you should start with the Assumption of price symmetry, when choosing targets and strike prices, if you're buying dollar cnh puts on the second run to 719, it makes sense to start with 668 as your price Target and then adjust for any other information. You have under Direction and expected volatility.  If you are short dollar cnh at the point the chart ends and you feel like the trade is losing its luster. This would be another input and possible reason to think it might be time to cut.  If you're bullish dollar cnh but want a reason to get long. This gives you 1  Note, that 1 reason, especially a chart. Based reason is never good enough for a trade idea, more appropriate would be that. You already have 3 or 4 reasons, derived, from fundamental positioning or cross market analysis and the chart symmetry gives you a nice entry point with a cheap stop-loss.  Reversal patterns.  We need to decide that you want. Want to take the other side of a trend, it's helpful to have specific indicators and patterns that will give you a signal that the time is, right?  Copious cache has been set on fire by Traders, blindly fading strong trends for no reason or using weak logic like, this is a big level or it's come too far too fast.  When I have a strong counter Trend view, I don't execute right away. Instead, I go on high alert and wait for a sign that it's time to jump in.  I would never enter a trade simply because of a reversal pattern or signal. But when I have a counter Trend view already for reasons unrelated to technical analysis. Here are 3 reversal patterns. I watch for  1 ending diagonal or Rising wedge. Now, here, I'm going to describe how it works at the highs, but these patterns work in Reverse at the lows as well.  And ending diagonal occurs when price rises in a slowly narrowing wedge as volatility contracts, even as the price continues to make new highs in the PDF, I show a nice example. Using NYX crude oil in 2018.  An interesting feature of the rising wedge formation is that as the triangle Narrows the triangle must eventually closed and the pattern must conclude.  Therefore you get a sense of when the turn might come if it's going to happen as the apex of the triangle is a timing tool.  My approach to trading wedges is simple.  When I have a counter Trend view, I wait for price to close below the wedge under the bottom line in the example of the PDF. Then I go short with a stoploss of the high.  In this example, I would sell crude at $70.80 on the day. It dropped out of the wedge on the big down day. My stop loss would be 72.85, which is above the highest high.  2 Doge a dogee is a Candlestick that forms when the opening and closing price of a security are the same.  The daily silver chart in the PDF has 2 Doge in a row after a 30% rally. The Doge are marked with large arrows,  a dogee is a Kind of indecision, price, went up and down and closed unchanged. When you see a doji or 2 Doge in a row. It's a sign that momentum has waned.  The prior trend is losing Steam.  If you are bare silver, in the case of the above chart, but wanted a sign that it was safe to get in the water. The dogee is a good signal.  Again, my methodology is simple. When I'm bearish a market that is in a strong Trend higher and I see a dogey I sell on the closed that day.  I also used OG's on hourly charts.  If I had no other information here, I would put my stop 1.5 average days, ranges away 1.5 times. The average daily range is my Baseline starting point when picking a stop-loss for a normal trade note. That I also look for major levels to consider before determining my stop loss level.  In this case, using 1 year of data as a look back, the average daily range in silver was 36 Cents. Therefore, the stop-loss is placed at the entry 1291. Plus 0.36 daily range * 1.5 so that's $13.45 is my stop loss.  There was another dogee, the next day, the high traded was 1322, and then silver cratered reversing the entire July August rally in 5 days.  Dois are simple and Powerful, warning signs of trend exhaustion.  And 3, hammers.  A hammer is a reversal candle where price makes a hard push in 1 Direction and closes at the opposite extreme. These are especially powerful if they come as a failed attempt at a major new high or low.  In the PDF. There's an example of a bull Hammer candle in Bitcoin  If you were bullish Bitcoin in early 2018 but wanted to signal to buy, you got a nice 1 in early February as the market made a bull Hammer after the 50% plus decline.  The bull Hammer is marked at the large arrow on the chart in the PDF.  the strategy is to wait for the Hammer by at the And put your stop-loss below, the low, of course, the same setup in Reverse at the highs is called a bare hammer and its bearish.  Note these patterns don't work, every time. There's also a bull hammer on that same chart in January, and that candle gave a bullish signal, that only worked for 3 days.  No technical signal or setup is going to be anywhere close to perfect. These reversal. Indicators are extremely useful though as they help you enter counter Trend trades with a set of logical risk management parameters that allow you to put on your reversal trade with meaningful Leverage.  Develop a short list of reversal indicators that you like and use them as triggers when you have a strong counter Trend view, be patient, then strike with maximum Force.  I'm now outlined a few ways to identify important levels and turning points. You should also have 1 or 2 indicators in your toolbox that help you identify the trend. And if that trend is overbought or oversold, here are 2 indicator sets. I use For Trend and overbought oversold.  Moving averages.  To measure the strength slope and direction of trend moving averages, are the simplest most effective indicator, I use 55 100 and 200 hour moving averages, on all my charts, I almost always use hourly charts for technical analysis. I sometimes zoom in with 10-minute charts or zoom out to the Daily for a different perspective. When I zoom in or out, I still use 55100 and 200 period moving averages.  Moving average are also sometimes called Mas.  Here are the 3 ways that I look at Mas 1.  The 200 hour is a great Trend indicator and I use it on its own for Trend Direction and also as support and resistance.  If I'm bearish, crude oil features and the price has been repeatedly capped by the 200 hour.  I'll use the next approach to the ma to get short, many Traders, use the 55-day in the NASDAQ as a trend indicator. If the Market's above the moving average and holding above it on pullbacks, that is a nice uptrend and vice versa, 1 of the most basic and effective strategies in trading, is to play the pullbacks in a primary Trend using a moving average. This strategy is simple and effective.  2 watch for crossovers. When the 55 our crosses up through the 200 hour that's bullish, at that point. Buying a pullback to the 55 our could be attractive if you have other good reasons to be bullish,  And 3, check the slope of the moving average. If all 3 Mas are flat. That's a choppy Range band Market. If all 3 are sloping upwards, that's a strong bull trend.  Here's a variation of a simple and effective, bullish, tactical approach, many use when they have a strong bullish view in a market.  Wait for a fast, ma to cross above a slower. Ma, which signals that an uptrend has formed. Wait for the price of the asset to retrace back to the fast. Ma buy with the stop at least. 1.5 days, ranges away, and below the 200 our ma that's simple and effective.  The selection of the period for the moving average, 55 versus 50 versus 20 is somewhat arbitrary and not super important. Just pick 2 or 3. Moving averages of different links and put them on your charts. You can also fit a moving average to the current Trend much in the way you would draw a trend line. Then if price breaks through that Ma, you know, the trend has lost its Mojo.  Relative strength indicator RSI.  Every Trader should have 1 or 2 indicators that tell them when their Market is extremely oversold or overbought on the time Horizon. They trade the Big 3 are RSI stochastics and deviation from a moving average.  RSI is the standard that everyone uses and the textbook strategy is that if it goes above 70, wait for it to fall, back below, 70 and then sell, but I use it differently.  I take as much data as possible using hourly. Data because that suits my trading time Horizon and find the Extremes in the RSI, going back. As far as I can. I then calculate the top and bottom 5%, most extreme and use these levels as get out, no matter what levels.  That is if I'm long and the RSI gets into the top 5% of the series, I cut I find that at the mega RSI extremes, the risk of a reversal is too high. So the risk reward on staying in the trend is poor.  If I'm trying to trade against the trend, I will also use these Mega extremes as an entry point.  Here's a super short excerpt from 1 of my dailies December 2nd 2020, where I use an extreme in the RSI to get short New Zealand dollar.  The textbook approach to trading RSI to wait for it to rise above 70 and then fall back below 70 and go short. I prefer to isolate the most extreme levels and use those as a reversal points right away.  I sorted all the daily New Zealand dollar, RSI, data from 2010. To know and the most extreme readings occur. When the RSI breaks above 75 that happened this week with the dramatic repricing in New Zealand rates and the non-stop flood of good vaccine news. Much goodness is in the price of New Zealand dollar now.  The table below shows how the pair performed in the 12 instances where the RSI went above 75 since 2010.  And in the PDF, I show that table.  You can see in the example, if you isolate the times when RSI is historically extreme, you can find points where you have high confidence to go the other way. When the New Zealand dollar RSI is above 75 future performance, is Raging bearish as New Zealand dollar averages a drop of 2.7% over the next 60 trading days and goes up only 25% of the time.  In this case I was already bearish risky assets and New Zealand dollar is a risky asset. So this just added to my thesis and gave me a way to play it. I went short New Zealand. At 740 with the stuff at 7111 and I take profit at 6911.  A high RSI on its own would not be enough to get me involved, but it's a nice seed that my grow into a full trade idea.  The deviation, the other overbought and oversold signal that I use, is the deviation of price, from a moving average or what, I simply call the deviation.  My technique is pretty simple. As usual, I take the price of the asset I'm trading and check how far it is from the 100 hour moving average. Then I look as far back as possible and see if the deviation tends to oscillate in a steady range or if it looks unreliable or random.  for many markets, you'll see that the deviation tends to Peak and trough around the same levels over and over when volatility is stable,  In the PDF, I show an example using smpp Minis.  This is easy to set up on your trading system, or in a spreadsheet, use historical data to determine what the extremes are in the deviation. Then use those extremes going forward as reversal signals. In this case, I filtered for the 5% of most extreme values in the deviation and this represents a move in the S&P of about 3.5%.  When using the deviation, it's important to understand the skew of your Market. Skew, is the direction of the market that tends to happen, faster and be more volatile. For example, stocks tend to sell off much more quickly than they rally. So, you might want to use a more conservative entry point for your deviation signal on the downside, or scaling gradually knowing that sell-offs can overshoot and are harder and more violent to fade.  An important note about using overbought and oversold signals think, think think think if the FED just announced a massive QE program and stocks were hired to extreme overbought on the short-term charts, that's probably not a signal that it's time to go short things that are overbought, can become more overbought and then more overbought again.  Overbought. On its own is not a reason to sell an asset. It's a warning sign that the future distribution of returns might be skewed lower, and that's it.  An elevated RSI reading or a sexy, stochastic are not reason enough to do a trade.  Incorporate overbought and oversold indicators into your process and use them to fine-tune entries and exits. But don't be the trader who Fades and moves solely, because it's come too far too fast. That is not a valid trading strategy. Remember we are using these technicals as guidance and tactical inputs and not as a systematic quantitative trading framework  Morning, quick texts, most trading jobs are busiest in the morning. Markets are already moving when you sit down, but still you need to prepare for the day by 7 a.m. each day. I'm Fielding client queries producing content planning my day. And going through hundreds of emails, I need to keep my mourning process as simple as possible. I like to create a quick sheet of text. And I put an example of it in the PDF.  Note that R1 R2 and R3 refer to the first 3 resistance levels. Well S1 S2 and S3 refer to the first 3 support levels.  The grid does not take long to update each morning because many of yesterday's levels remain valid today, and all the stuff on the bottom updates, automatically using a data feed from Bloomberg.  Good Traders. Have an established mourning process to prepare for the day. And part of that process should be to identify significant reference points for the day ahead. You know, the old saying about luck and preparation.  That concludes this section on technical analysis. I strongly advise you to keep things simple and stick with just a few indicators and techniques that make sense to you.  Remember that texts are just the frosting on the trade idea cake. Don't try to make an entire cake out of frosting.  Sentiment. And positioning.  The market cycle is always a complex Dance, featuring narrative. Sentiment sometimes the news drives the price, but quite often the price drives the news. In other words, sometimes a strong Trend takes on a life of its own and unfolds faster than the story on the ground which follows behind  While I believe sentiment, and positioning are important variables to consider in every trade and can sometimes be the main driver of a trade idea. I also believe they are overrated as indicators. By many Traders, we discussed sentiment a fair bit in the section on hurting bias, but there are some other important points to cover  Here are the key points on sentiment and positioning.  1 sentiment and positioning matters, sometimes, but not most of the time 2 80 to 90% of the time sentiment just follows price. So if you trade against sentiment and positioning, you're often just fighting the trend and 3, add inflection points attuning feel for positioning and sentiment can be a huge source of edge.  Positioning is packed with potential energy. Like fuel for a future fire.  Positioning unwinds are like fires. They need heat a spark or Catalyst fuel large positions, and oxygen more, bad news or mark-to-market losses, that trigger feedback loops that lead to more position on lines.  You need large positions, a catalyst and mark-to-market losses all at once. Then you get a chain reaction that continues until it finally Burns itself out or it's put out by a central bank.  When I was in grade school, they taught us this process with the fire triangle.  Large positions are like piles of dry Tinder that can potentially burst into flame at any moment but probably won't remember just because you have a large stack of dry wood next to an open can of gasoline, that does not mean there will be a fire. Here's a simple positioning and sentiment framework I use.  Sentiment is bullish and increasing, that's bullish.  Sentiment is bullish and stable still bullish.  Sentiment is bullish. But Calling, that's bearish.  And if sentiment is bearish and stable or bearish in getting more bearish, that's bearish, but if its bearish but getting less bearish that's bullish.  So, essentially what you want to know is the rate of change in sentiment versus the trend, or in other words going against sentiment works at the turning points, but not during the trend, if you can identify a palpable turn in sentiment by observation of behavior, or by a data analysis, you can position ahead of the crowd.  Sources of sentiment and positioning data.  The best source of sentiment at positioning information is knowledgeable, observation of how people discuss a market. This is easier. If you've been trading for a few years and talked to many people in the market, but you can also get a sense of this from reading news and social media. Just remember that many channels are biased.  In terms of data the most commonly used positioning data, comes from the cftc.  This data shows the positioning of non-commercial speculation. While it's closely followed and can be interesting information. It has no predictive power on its own. If you see copper Longs on cftc, hit all-time high. Your instinct is probably to go short copper but the Inconvenient Truth is that a setup like that is actually modestly. Bullish on all-time Horizons.  The cftc data is slow moving and Trend following in its directional. Not contrarian, do not use cftc data by itself as a contrarian indicator.  Options markets, often contain important positioning information. For example, when stocks rise and vix Rises at the same time, you know, that something unusual is going on because the correlation is almost, always inverted between these 2, stocks up. Picks up, is a sign that the market is so bullish. It's adding to upside with calls of hedging. The downside with puts, you can also look at the put call ratio for a read on Equity sentiment, in currency markets. People, look at the risk reversal to see if trade, ERS, have a strong preference for puts or calls and how that preference is changing.  As with most sentiment data, the risk reversal mostly follows price. But when there's a Divergence that is dull and going up, even as the risk reversal is morbid for dollar, puts that can be a signal. That something is a miss.  Positioning surveys can be a useful source of information, their timely and fast. Moving people change their minds quickly as opposed to Trend following systems, which move much more slowly as they wait for Price confirmation. Again with surveys, most of the time, they are directional. The only time they're contrarian is when they hit an extreme in the positioning, surveys, I've done. When working at Banks, I found that when sentiment made a record high or low, for the past year, that could often be a good sign of a turn.  In the stock market. There are many, sentiment, surveys and indicators available. I like the aii survey Bulls versus Bears, CNN's, fear, and greed indicator is also a Simple, snapshot of equity sentiment.  Many banks publish sentiment and positioning data. In FX, there's the city pain index and the HSBC. Positioning indicators in Broad, macro the Bank of America Global fund manager survey gets a lot of attention and highlights crowded positions and tail risks.  Retail Brokers, like Goa dukascopy and daily FX. Publish detailed positioning data.  Each market has its important sentiment, and positioning data. And this is generally easy to find simply by Google as you become expert. In your Market, you'll learn the best sentiment and positioning indicators to follow.  Finally magazine covers can be the ultimate contrarian indicator when a financial team hits a cover of a mainstream magazine. Always take note by the time journalists believe the theme is worthy of a cover story that theme is by definition. Well known. That means the theme is probably also crowded for more on the magazine cover indicator Google. Donnelly magazine cover indicator.  How do you use sentiment and positioning data?  Sentiment and positioning data can help you significantly at turning points. The number 1, Takeaway on sentiment, and positioning whether you're using surveys, options, markets, or other sources of information is that only the super mega extremes are times when you should consider fading.  Otherwise positioning and sentiment are mostly just Trend indicators and they move up and down with the price.  In chapter 9, we discussed has sentiment and positioning of all of, as a market moves through its narrative cycle, I want to mention here that when sentiment is at an extreme and the narrative starts to turn, this is a situation where good sentiment and positioning analysis can make you money.  Extreme Bears sentiment usually reflects that the price has been going down and there's a strong and compelling Bearer story that explains the selloff  Interesting moment comes when the narrative starts to turn good. News starts to emerge but price does not turn higher right away. Confirmation bias, hampers the Judgment of the individual and it also impacts the Judgment of the crowd in aggregate. You'll often see the news flow turn against a major Trend, but no reaction in the price at first  Often Traders with lower confidence will defer to the market. They might say, oh, I guess the news isn't that bullish after all, since the market keeps going lower, while expert Traders, with the strong understanding of the narrative and a positioning, will see an opportunity in the mismatch between price and narrative. They'll say something more like the news flow has clearly turned bullish here but the markets clinging to the old bearish narrative short, positioning is in the 97th percentile and I bet there's going to be a huge reversal soon.  Then that expert Trader will go on high alert for signals. That price has bottomed. This could be as simple as waiting for a moving average to break or waiting for a bullish, reversal pattern like a hammer, ending diagonal, or keyword. personal day, The Savvy Trader sees that the sell-off is set to reverse but Waits  she looks for evidence that a reversal in price is happening and finds setups that allow for a reasonable stop-loss. She knows better than to Simply buy over and over as the price continues to plummet, try not to catch falling knives. Remember what they say about bottom Pickers?  Wait, for an indication that things have turned before you trade against a powerful trend.  In chapter 12, I'll go through a specific example of how I used a Divergence between sentiment and narrative to get set on a counter Trend trade.  Alpha Traders, use multiple approaches to find high. Confidence trades. They wait for multiple indicators to line up.  They use fundamentals narrative analysis, positioning and sentiment, and other factors to get a reading on the market. Then they use technical analysis to fine-tune timing entry and exit. They structure trades in a way that acknowledges that many ideas will be Wrong. So that when they're inevitably wrong, the cost is small.  When they are right, the payoff is large.  Excellent Traders are confident in their views but also know they are frequently wrong.  Some hedge funds, make all their trading decisions using macro analysis but then simply filter every idea with 1 or 2, simple. Technical indicators trade ideas, remain in the off, State until the technical indicator, puts them in the on position.  for example, let's say a fund has a pod comprised of 3, genius analysts and 2, senior portfolio, managers  They currently hold 5 Core views, foolish, dollar Yen, polish Apple, Polish gold, bearish, bonds, and bearish Amazon.  The fund will then systematically apply a simple filter to the ideas. Let's say a 55-day moving average, the Pod will only put on the trades that are on the correct side of the 55-day, moving average, for example, they'll only go short Amazon, if it's below the 55-day, this avoids. Extended periods of wrongness because if Amazon enters a prolonged uptrend, the fund will stay flat the whole time as the stock trends higher and remains above its 55-day. Moving average, when price breaks below the 55-day, the fund will put on their Amazon short. If Amazon closes back above the 55-day, they're out.  This approach of trading macro with a technical filter is an excellent model. It allows you to find your Edge on the analysis side but then forces you to admit you're wrong when price goes against you.  Remember that no approach is perfect and shall be markets. The trend signal will generate a ton of noise and that can be costly. But overall the multifactor fundamental approach with a technical filter is a strong logical approach to Trading.  I hope this chapter is giving you a sense of how I use technical analysis, sentiment, and positioning, in my trading process, there are no correct answers when it comes to trading. So, take what resonates with you? In this chapter and throw out, what does not you should develop or process that fits your personality and suits your objectives? Never strictly. Follow someone, else's advice  Now, it's time to move on to the most important topic in trading risk management. You can do everything else, right? But if you fail at risk management, you automatically fail at Trading,  no matter how good a chef you are, you'll never succeed in the restaurant business, if you keep burning down your kitchen,  Chapter 11? You feel lucky punk?  Data collection risk management and variance.  Most of what I've learned from gambling is also true for investing.  People mostly don't understand risk reward and uncertainty. Their investment results would be better if they did and quote  Edward Thorp a man for all markets.  in this chapter, we'll Discuss risk management. If you are new to trading this chapter will help you build and Implement a robust risk management framework. If you're an experienced professional, I hope you will extract a few nuggets of wisdom and alternative viewpoints and use these observations to make incremental improvements to your current framework.  Risk management is the most important skill in trading. Everything else is a distant. Second, you can have the best ideas, the greatest algorithms, the best instinctive pattern recognition, and the fastest execution systems, but if you're risk management system is not adequate, you will fail.  I could write an entire book about risk management but a that would be boring to write. So I'm not going to do that. And B, the real Essentials of risk management are fairly simple and can be boiled down into 1 chapter.  The big challenges in Risk Management, come from Trading businesses, that employ complex strategies, huge portfolios correlated assets ill, liquid markets, and nonlinear Derivative products.  For short-term directional traders in liquid markets. It's pretty easy to establish. An appropriate set of risk management. Rules the hard part is following them.  Collect and analyze p&l data.  Before you develop a risk management system, you need to build a solid data collection system collecting and analyzing p&l data is 1 of the most important and Powerful activities in trading.  Much in the way. Trading journal provides qualitative feedback. P&l analysis provides quantitative feedback. This does not need to be complicated if you don't already have 1. Create a spreadsheet to track your daily p&l columns, should include date stop-loss, open high, low close,  Date is today's date. Stop-loss is your daily stop-loss today. If you have 1 open is how much you made overnight, that is your p&l. When you start trading in the morning,  This is useful to track. Because it's a different type of trading than what you do during the day.  High and low. Give you a sense of your daily p&l, volatility over time and also what the extremes tend to be.  After collecting a year or so of data, you might notice that you tend to top out at the same level at the same time and then closed lower. If you always peek around the same high, then closed lower consider setting a take-profit target for the day.  Many Traders will consistently have a tough time breaking through a specific level of p&l in a given day?  This tendency to Peak at a specific. P&l level is not random. It reflects a combination of your position size and the volatility of your Market.  if you trade hundred billion dollar positions in a product that tends to move, no more than 1% per day, you're going to notice your p&l tops at around 1 million quite often  To break to a higher Plateau. You first need to know the level of your current Plateau. Then you need to calculate how you can move to a higher level.  The next step to building a quality. Tnl. Tracking spreadsheet is to set up individual pnl columns for each major product and sub product. You trade FX Bond stocks. If your Macro, for example, or individual stocks, if you're an equity day trader that trades particular names  This is highly individual and depends on what you think is worth tracking.  A note of caution here, keep it high level. If you trade 50 stocks, there's not much Point maintaining a column for each stock. There's a point at which your spreadsheet, has so much data that it yields mostly noise and little actionable information.  Note that if you're a day trader, you can't be an expert in 50 different stocks and you shouldn't be trading that many anyway.  Another idea is to set up columns for each strategy, you run. If you have 1 strategy to trade the market open, another 1, that trades during the day and a third strategy that trades on news, you can create 1 column for each strategy to track how they're doing over time.  The idea here is to have data that will help you. Answer, what is working and what is not and then you can do more of what's working and less of what is not.  The spreadsheet should not be more than 12 to 15 columns wide, including month to date and year to date columns on the far right.  If you have more than 15 columns aggregate or combine, some of them, until you can see the whole thing on 1 screen.  There's a point where too much information is bad, be thoughtful about what data might be useful, and collect the data, you can always add new columns later, keep it fairly basic for now.  Once you have about 6 months of data calculate the following, when percent, which is number of winning days, divided by total, number of trading days,  Average winning day in dollars or basis points, average losing day in dollars or basis points.  Win lose dollars or basis points ratio.  This is simply your average winning day, divided by your average losing day.  This is the most important statistic for most short-term Traders. Your piano is simply number of winning days times. Average winning day minus number of losing days times average losing day.  There are just 2 numbers. You need to control your win percent and the ratio of the size of your winning days to the size of your losing days. That's it.  There's no right answer for how these 2 stats should combine but win percent is much more difficult to influence than the relationship between your winning and losing days. Your win percent is usually determined more by your trading style and the seat. You're in, whereas the ratio of your winning Day, pnl to your losing day. Pnl is influenced by your discipline, patience, and ability to cut losses and ride winners.  That ratio tends to be the best reflection of trading skill in my opinion.  I've been keeping these trading stats since 2006 and it's surprising how consistently my win percent. Hovers around 50%.  All my success or failure is determined by the size of my winning days, versus the size of my losing days. And more precisely if I can keep the losers under control, the winners tend to take care of themselves.  I have no trouble making money, but I often have trouble keeping it. This is the profile of the active, risk-seeking Trader?  On the other hand, a skilled. But more risk averse Trader might have a higher win percent. Say 60%, the idea here is to collect enough data. And then start to think about changes, you can make to either increase your win percent or increase the size of your updates, relative to the size of your down days.  Like I said earlier, for most Traders, the up versus down day ratio is easier to influence than the win percent.  What stocks or currencies or Commodities? Do you make money in?  Also, which ones cost you money. Important note here don't overestimate the importance of this information. Good products, and good markets, come and go. I've heard people say, stuff like I keep losing money in euro dollar. It's just stuck in the stupid range. I really need to take it off my screen. In that scenario, the problem is not euro dollar. The problem is that it's in a range and it sounds like the trader isn't very good at trading ranges. If she takes euro dollar offer screen and then it Treads higher for 10, straight days. She's probably going to miss a huge opportunity.  Collect data on specific assets and asset classes, not so you can put them in the Penalty Box, but so you can isolate. What is working and what isn't? And why?  How many times do you breach your stop-loss? What were the causes on each of those days? Anytime you're low? Or close is lower than your stop loss? That's a red flag. Something is wrong with your process. Your positions are too big. You're too slow to stop out. You're out of control in some way if you're a manager, take stop-loss as seriously. Don't increase the trader. Stop when it hits shutter down.  Performance by day of the week. And on event days, are you making all your money on fed days and month end and losing money? Every Monday. Look for patterns that make sense. But be careful not to be Fooled by Randomness here. If you can explain why a pattern exists, it's much less likely that it's an artifact of randomness.  What time of day do you make and lose money on average? This is a bit more work and involves a separate spreadsheet where you take a snapshot of your p&l, every 30 minutes.  After a few months, you'll have an interesting p&l curve, that will show you how your profitability evolves throughout the day.  Are you making all your money on the open then leaking half of it back out over the course of the day, do you lose money consistently from 11:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. every day?  Many Traders make all their money in the morning. Then spend the rest of the day. Trying not to give a back. This is dumb. If you make all your money in the morning, shut down at noon and find other ways to be productive. Do research, read, workout, Etc. Even if you work at a bank, nobody's going to force you to trade. In the afternoon. Try to get a strong sense of how time of day influences, your performance. Personally, I make most of my My money overnight and from 7 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. and the period from 11:00 a.m. to 5:00. P.m. New York is a p&l graveyard.  Identify the juicy times to train and act with focused aggression during these times for the lackluster parts of your training day, find replacement activities to keep you occupied. So you do not press buttons at a boredom.  You should also look at monthly and yearly data as time goes on. Ideally, your p&l should skew to the right on every time frame. In other words, your biggest day should be updates. Not down days. Your biggest months should be positive. Not negative, you should rarely lose money in a year and never 2 years in a row. The more Edge you have, the more this paragraph will be true of your trading statistics.  Develop a risk management system.  You have your data collection system. Now, you need a risk management system, this section is about risk management for short-term traders who trade, liquid products and take mostly directional risk. If you sell low, Delta options or run, a 78 line portfolio or buy and sell Frontier Market bonds, this section does not apply to you.  I think the most useful way to explain my risk management system. Thought process is to start with longer time Horizons. Then gradually zoom in to smaller and smaller increments.  I'll start with 1 trading year. Then discuss monthly risk management. Then move all the way down to daily, risk management, and individual trades.  There is no single correct answer when it comes to managing risk, your risk management system has to match your personality, your time Horizon, your trading style, your Capital, your access to leverage and the liquidity profile of the products you trade. I'm going to outline how I think about risk management and give you some of the details of my risk management system. Take what makes sense to you, discard what does not  Yearly risk management.  In most trading jobs 1, year is the most important unit of trading performance. Almost all bank and Real Money traders are paid based on annual performance and most hedge funds. Also use the calendar year as their main unit of time for evaluation and compensation.  Sure, some hedge funds pay out more than once per year and Retail Traders, don't think as much about yearly increments, but all Traders should think about monitor analyze and Target. Yearly performance.  In order to survive in the long run, you want your yearly performance to look like that of a call option?  This means flat or perhaps small losses in the backyards and medium-sized to huge games in the good years.  20 years of performance for a skilled adoptable Trader using the risk management style of described in this chapter might look something like the chart in the PDF.  that chart shows 20 years of trading for a skilled Trader who behaves like a call option,  To achieve this sort of distribution of p&l, you need to do 3 things.  1 start, slow and increase risk, as you Here today. P&l builds.  You cannot have the same risk appetite on January 1 with zero P and L on the coffers as you can on August 15th.  This means there must be an arbitrary change in your risk appetite each January but that's just the way things go.  In an ideal world, you should always be varying your risk appetite based on conviction and Market opportunity but we live in the real world as such you need to start slow and build risk over time.  There's something special and scary about the zero mound in pno. Let's say a hypothetical Trader named Steven Kirk wants to make 10 million this year and a stop-loss is $4 million.  You will find that going from plus million dollars to plus 1 million feels significantly less bad than going from plus 500 K to minus 500 K, even though both are pnl declines of dollars.  Any red number next to your name? Feels bad.  This is consistent with Theory, which tells us that if a gain gives us X pleasure, a loss of the same magnitude gives us 2x pain.  This is not all just psychological though.  As Steve's pnl Falls below zero. His ability to take risk. That is his leverage decreases. There's a nonlinear real world impact of losses. As he lives below zero and closer to his stop loss. When you're below 0.0, you wear a straight jacket.  Let's say it's February 15th has Steve psychology at year to date piano of 750,000. He's not ecstatic because he's a bit behind plan but not too bad. How about it year to date? P&l is zero still, okay? Probably at minus 1 million, he's getting a bit nervous that minus 2 million. Steve is halfway to a stop loss. After only 6 weeks,  At that point, he's going to need to reduce his risk in order to avoid hitting the disaster Zone, which is around 3 million. Remember, even if your stop loss is in big trouble trading wise much before then because you'll need to reduce your position size in order to avoid getting the shoulder tap.  You need to start the year slow and build up.  The year has a great deal of path dependence which means that how you start has a big influence on where you end up if Steve loses 2 million dollars in January the odds that he will hit is 10 million dollar goal are almost zero. If he makes 400 K in January and 600 K in February, he's behind budget but still in an okay position.  The idea is to get safely away from the zero bound and then when a mega opportunity arrives and you have a cushion, go for it.  If Steve's plus 1.5 million on February 25th and there's a fantastic opportunity. He's in a position to risk, a bigger chunk of cash, say 500 K on the idea without worrying about putting himself underwater  Remember that rule number 1 of trading is don't blow up. Always give yourself a chance to play tomorrow.  It's tricky to give precise mathematical formulas for risk management because this implies there is a correct answer. There is no precise answer in Risk Management.  Every Trader, every bank, and every hedge fund must manage risk differently. What I can tell you is how I think about risk in different scenarios. You can either mirror parts of this framework. If it makes sense to you or you can transform it to fit your needs.  Before I can establish my basic yearly framework. I need to know my free capital.  Free capital is the amount of money you can afford to lose for retail Traders. That's the portion of your account, you feel, you can lose in a year and still come back.  For Bank, real money and hedge fund Traders. It's your annual stop loss.  My strategy is to start slow and build up Capital then get as aggressive as possible. If there are juicy Market opportunities by June or July at the latest hopefully earlier.  Budgets vary over the years but I will again. Is the 104 million dollar stop loss because that's a realistic ratio and the absolute numbers don't matter. As much as the relative figures.  Using the same 2.5 to 1 ratio, a retail Trader, might be risking a maximum loss of dollars, for the year, with the goal of making a 100,000, a hedge fund Trader, might have a stop loss of 40 million and a target of 100 million.  This 2.5 to 1 ratio is not brutal. It's just a realistic ratio that's in the ballpark.  Some Bank Traders might have a tighter stop loss of 2 million and be looking to make 20 million. If they have a great market-making seat, a retail Trader might be risking 20,000 but hope to make 200,000  Again, the numbers are presenting in this chapter are not meant to be immutable laws of Finance. They are realistic parameters that work in my world but may need to be adjusted in yours.  A Trader with a maximum loss of 4 million and a target of 10 million can allow more risk-taking when he's doing. It should take less risk when he's struggling based on year to today. Pnl, a good system is to allocate a new monthly stop on the first day of the month and determine that stop-loss using the year to date pnl. The better, you're doing the more leverage you use in the next month. If good opportunities arise  In the PDF, I show a table that shows a reasonable scale for the $7 stop-loss Trader. Who wants to make $1. The objective is never to get to your year-to-date goal and then just put your feet up. The objective is to get stronger and stronger and stronger over the course of the year. So you can take maximum risk when rare opportunities arise under the sort of framework. You might find yourself up 6 million in June and able to spend 1 million on a strong trade idea, that makes 4 million  Then you're up 10 million in July. You can sit on your hands until the next huge opportunity comes.  If your goal for the year was 10 million and you're there in July, you put yourself in a position to make 20 million. Or maybe more those chances. Don't come along every year. Keep Trading.  Often the p&l chart of an alpha macro Trader in a good year. Will look like a series of steps with interval periods where the p&l flat lines. This is the p&l trajectory of a Trader that waits for the big opportunities and then puts on meaningful risk at the right times. This is not the trajectory for every Alpha Trader, a good retail, scalper or news Trader, for example, will have a p&l chart that looks more like a 45 degree angle,  but even if a Trader that's consistent, should be taking more risk and making more money when they're strongly positive for the year and taking less risk, when they are close to zero or negative year to date.  2, understand the metagame.  Trading successfully and moving the risk level up and down throughout the year. Requires a good understanding of the specific metagame. You are playing  You need to understand the internal rules incentives, politics and risk management framework, where you work and incorporate. Ate these into your risk management decisions as well.  For example, does your boss freak out when you lose more money than x? If so you know that that is the internal no-go line. Even if there's never been a rule set, does your contract say you'll get fired if you lose more than 9%? Well, history shows that traders that your firm tend to get de-risked or fired when they lose 5%.  Forget the number in the contract. The metagame rules say your stop loss should be 5%.  If you work at a bank, does your compensation Flatline? Once your p&l hits a certain threshold?  If you yes then keep in mind. If you hit that threshold losses will cost you more in compensation than gains will help you adjust your risk accordingly.  There are so many different meta games depending on where you work. Take a few minutes to think about the metagame in your seat. Even if you're a retail Trader, there's probably a metag game. For example, if you don't earn a certain amount of money in your first 2 years, will your spouse get antsy and ask you to get a real job. If so then you need to set your target above that level.  You need your family on board or you will find life difficult. Trading is incredibly hard. It will. Inevitably test your belief in yourself. If those around you management family, the person who provided your trading Capital, don't believe in you, it will be impossible.  3, don't blow up.  This 1 so simple. And yet Traders, blow up all the time, trade liquid products. If you're a retail Equity Trader, don't short the biotech, that just tripled from 1 150 to 450. If you're a currency Trader, don't take positions in pegged, currencies.  Manage your overnight and weekend risk tightly.  the smaller, your account size are free Capital, the more careful you need to be,  If you sell options, think about ridiculous worst case scenarios and avoid them.  The universe of Trades is so large in every asset class. There's no excuse for putting on trades that have unlimited downside. You should be confident about your ability to stop out of any trade. Or you should keep it small enough, it's not going to kill you if it goes pear-shaped.  And has a low probability of a huge tail risk, cover it and find something better to trade.  Path. Dependence is an important concept for every professional Trader to understand it comes into play in different ways path. Dependence means future steps of a process depend on its history. A series of coin flips is not path. Dependent.  If you flip 10 tales the coin has no memory. And the 11th flip is fair. And 50/50, on the other hand each month in a trading year is path, dependent your performance. In January will determine your free capital in your state of mind for February.  The most important thing to remember is to never take actions in 1, period, that could be overly detrimental to Future periods.  For example, you work at a bank where p&l resets every January 1st, there's a perfect 5-star setup. In S&P futures And you've never been so confident there about to finally crash your approach to this trade, the sizing, you choose and the amount of capital you'll risk should be different in January than in August.  Well this is irrational from a theoretical point of view in real life. There's too much path dependence in January for you to go all in. You must have conservatively knowing that your performance in January. Will influence your performance in the following 11 months.  On the other hand, if your annual Target was 5 million, and you're now up 7 million and it's September, you know, that even if you lose 2 million on this trade idea, it won't have much negative impact on your trading for the final 3 months of the year.  I know this might not seem rational to you but believe me it is playing the multi period, metagame correctly. Is just as important as maximizing, p&l for a given period,  Another way path. Dependence matters is when you start a new job in training, a Trader that is made money 8. Straight years, doesn't attract much attention. If she loses money in year 9 on the other hand, a new hire that loses money in his first 4 months of training, might make a manager question. Why they hired him.  Financial firms. Are generally not very good at separating luck from skill or at comparing Market regimes to Trader performance.  The absolute number next to your name matters much more than any context surrounding it.  Therefore when you start a new trading job, it is crucial that you understand how much runway you have.  As ridiculous as it sounds, your ultimate success or failure. At a hedge fund is usually determined within the first 18 months.  Your entire career or lack of career at the fund will be rooted in that initial performance, the trader that comes out hot and shoots, the lights out will be given, plenty of slack going forward and could probably draw down in future without too much hassle.  The equally skilled Trader that comes in and loses money for the first 5 months will be under heightened scrutiny. Even if those 5 Months where the lowest volatility period in the history of his asset class, and he's known to be a Trader that performs well in high ball markets.  The way to protect against this path. Dependence, when switching firms is to ensure, you have at least 1 and hopefully, 2 or 3 strong supporters within the organization.  And make sure that the strong supporter who brought you in is planning to stay.  Once your sponsor leaves your life or death in that firm becomes even more path dependent. Try to avoid relying on luck by ensuring that you have sufficient Runway. When you go to a new firm,  Jerry, the greatest Trader Who Never Was.  Jerry was 1 of the best pure Traders I've ever seen, but he drove so fast. We all knew that. Eventually he would slam into the wall.  Jerry was a 21 year old College Dropout who worked in the same day, trading office, as I did, in the late 1990s, he had no financial markets background. He was a pure Gambler who found his way onto the trading floor because Are a few lucky coincidences. He loved to go out clubbing until 3:00 a.m. then come in and trade the pre-open at 8:00 a.m. he was hilarious and immature and knew very little about markets  Despite all this, he had a credible instincts, he had a professional gambler's. I for risk, reward and opportunity.  He was like a modern-day Jesse Livermore who could read the tape and sentiment and price action and make money in ways that were incredibly skillful and fun to watch.  Jerry could feel what was going to happen before it happened. He was so obviously good at trading that the 40 year old Trader, that was randomly seated next to him, to decided to close his own account, and back Jerry and Stead.  But Jerry couldn't stay away from the thinly traded names.  He would yell out look at insert ticker symbol of a thinly traded stock. Nobody has ever heard of here. It's exploding  We would bring up the chart and see some random micro cap trading at $5.25 up 361%. % on the day.  Instead of trading 1 set wide and 500 or more shares, like most stocks, these stocks jumped around in 1 increments trading 30 cents wide and 100 shares.  Jerry would sell 3,000 shares taking it down from 525 to 425. And this would often trigger a waterfall. Move that let him quickly take profit at say 3.10.  There was yelling involved and it was incredibly fun to watch. He would then go back to trading normal, stocks and making money and someone would say to him Jerry you can't trade those micro cups 1 day. 1 of them will just keep going. You'll get carded out of here.  He would listen closely and not his head and say yeah dude you're right I'll stop doing that for sure. Then 3 Days Later Jerry's yelling and I crossed the floor. Oh boy. I'm sure a lot of this 1. This is not good.  The stock went from 2 dollars to 4 dollars and he got short 7,000 shares, few minutes later, it was 6 dollars. Then 8 dollars his 50,000 account was suddenly worth minus $6,000, the manager of the trading floor, issued emerging call forced area to buy back. All the shares at an average of 8.20, the stock closed a day at 3 dollars.  Jerry was such an obviously talented kid. That even after that incident, a different Trader seated him, another 50,000 4 months later, guess what? Same thing happened.  Jerry had amazing natural skill as a Trader but it didn't matter. He blew up.  This is an extreme case, but a true story of how risk of Ruin is the first and most important risk to manage never enter a trade. Unless, you know, you can get out 1 of my previous bosses. Once said, trading is like driving a race car. You want to drive as fast as possible, but you can never lose control or crash into the wall.  Don't be like, Jerry don't crash into the wall?  Astute readers might notice that Jerry's story sounds a bit like the story of the hedge funds that were mega short, low-priced illiquid stocks in January 2021. Those funds like Jerry broke. The first rule of trading, don't blow up the GameStop. Episode was a friendly reminder that. No amount of upside justifies putting on positions, you cannot properly risk manage. It was also a friendly reminder that short positions in cheap. Stocks have limited profit potential and unlimited downside stay away from trades with that payoff, profile.  Monthly risk management.  At the start of each month, you should take stock of your year-to-date performance and decide on a reasonable goal and stop loss for the month ahead.  As the year progresses you have more ammunition to take more risk. So if you've been doing well, increase your monthly allocation, if you're struggling, keep it flat or cut it.  Keep in mind that increasing your risk, allocation does not mean you have to start taking bigger positions on the first day of the month, what it means is that when a juicy opportunity arrives in the new month, you allocate more to it than you would have in the prior month. Just, before the start of a new month, you should determine monthly stop-loss monthly profit goal.  Dollars at risk for type 1. Type 2 and type 3 trades which I'll Define soon and 1 personal goal of Fitness, sleep eating Etc.  As we move down the fractals from yearly, to monthly to daily to single trades, there's an important concept you should have in your mind variance.  Let's talk about variance for a few minutes because it's a crucial Concept in trading.  First, here's a quote that says it up nicely.  Quote, the laws of probability so true in general. So fallacious in particular and quote, Edward Gibbon 17774.  In statistics and probability variance, is the concept that in a series of numbers with a given average, individual data points will be spread out away from the average. So even if your average daily p&l over the last 10 years is plus 23,000, you might still lose 25,000 5 days in a row once. This may not mean you did anything wrong, it's just variance.  Variance is a prominent feature in poker a well-rested? Professional. Poker player will inevitably beat a drunk amateur over a long period. Say 12 hours, but over a 10-minute or even 30 minute period, the drunk amateur could easily prevent  The key to understanding variance is that it's most visible in small samples, the larger the sample, the closer, the aggregate data will approach. The true. Average luck is a short-term thing, but in the long run skill prevails  Then again, as keen's famously said in the long run, we're all dead.  A very solid trading strategy with significant Edge generate substantial variance even year to year. This is why it's incredibly difficult to evaluate Traders portfolio managers and hedge funds. Was it luck or was it skill?  Michael mobus and his book, The Luck equation, untangling skill and luck in business is the go-to book. On this topic.  To give you a sense of how variants impacts a year of performance and training. I ran a few simulations for Simplicity. We'll use a static risk management approach where the trader does not change their risk appetite during the year regardless of performance.  That said, I strongly Advocate increasing your risk as your pnl Rises.  I include these simulations because I think very few people even expert trainers. Truly appreciate just how dramatic the impact of variance can be on performance.  Probably in defense mechanism.  If we truly appreciate it, how important variants was, we'd feel like we barely control our own fate and humans, love to believe they're in control.  The simulations are in the PDF. The first 1 approximates, the performance of a retail Trader, she makes money 50% of days and loses money. 50% of days, her average winning day is $2,000. Net and her average losing day is -200 based on these figures. She'll Expect to make 100,800 in an average year.  But when we simulate her cumulative year to date, p&l 100 times, it looks much noisier than that, of course.  The same Trader using the same strategy in a world. With the same probabilities might make 50,000 1 year and 150,000 the next  With variance and literally nothing else to blame.  The second simulation represents a bag Trader. He makes money 55% of days and loses money. 45% of days, his average winning day. Net is 150,000 and his average losing day is minus 120,000.  Based on these figures, his expected value is plus 7.2 million, but take a look at the 100ul in the PDF.  You can see that despite employing a process with substantial Edge and positive expected value his annual performance is all over the place, simply due to variance.  This is a big reason why it is so FL. Something difficult for management to properly, assess Traders, and for Traders to evaluate themselves, it's easy to be Fooled by Randomness.  1 of the most difficult and most important skills in trading is the ability to distinguish between variants and bad decision-making, if you're losing money right now. Is it because your process has broken down. Your discipline sucks and the market is completely changed.  Or is it because of the inevitable variance within the p&l distribution.  When you're on a bad streak, you need to ask yourself this.  Longer you've been trading the easier. This is to answer for me, I can usually look back on a losing streak and determine what the fair amount of confidence. Whether it was variance when you're starting out, it's almost impossible to tell  Here are some examples of how I look at a losing streak and determine whether it's a product of variance or bad process.  Variance 1. I was wrong. A lot being wrong. Is part of trading. It's okay to be wrong 2. I got unlucky. I was long. And some bad news came out yesterday today. I got stopped out at the highs.  When I'm wrong and I lose money. I barely care that's trading. As long as I've been sticking to my risk management system. I shrug and move on being wrong, is where variants comes from in trading. Don't worry about it.  On the other hand, some things can't be attributed to variants, not variants 1. I've been right? And I'm reading the market, well, but I'm losing money. This is a strong indicator that there's something wrong with my process or risk management for much of 2020. I was in sync with the market and my percentage of accurate calls was very high, but my performance was disappointing because of multiple breakdowns and discipline and process.  I was wrong sizing, my trades, and bleeding on random low conviction ideas, if you're reading the market, well, and losing money, that's a red flag. Something is wrong with your process and it's not just variance.  2, I traded with no plan, I walked in each day and started hitting by. Buttons without a good sense of what I was trying to do. I cut out a good ideas early because I was bored.  3, I'm overtrading.  I should be tight aggressive, but instead, I'm making a series of small bets on random dumb ideas and leaking money every day.  4. I left a stale order in the system overnight and it triggered a loss. Poor attention to detail is not bad luck.  5, my discipline is poor. I broke my risk management. Rules, my positions were way too big. I kept moving my stop lowering of cutting. I doubled a losing position.  6. The market regime is changed and I have not adapted 7. My boss is giving me a hard time and making me nervous 8 if I keep losing money, I'm going to lose my job.  9, I'm tired. I'm arguing with my spouse or children. I think I might get a divorce. I'm drinking too much. I feel depressed. I don't want to do this anymore.  If loss is stem from any of 1 to 9 above, that's not very ants. That's bad trading, bad process or bad mindset cut all your risk and figure out how to get things back on track.  when you trust yourself to do the right thing, you're trading well,  It should not matter all that much whether you make or lose money on any given day.  When you're trading with a good mindset, you see each trade and each day as a series of independent events with a probabilistic nature and you understand that some trades and some days, you will lose money.  Each day you come in and do your best without getting too high or too low.  You invest most of your energy in the process in very little in the outcome. Each trade you go through a thoughtful process and execute in a rational and systematic way.  If you trade sloppy, don't say I suck. Or I traded so bad today instead. Ask, why was I so sloppy today? Am I burnt out? Discouraged disengaged robotic application of a process? Keeps you sane? And lets, you know, you can trust yourself if you break your stop-loss repeatedly. You should quickly figure out why that discipline no automation of stop-loss. Don't care anymore.  If you go through the above lists variants versus not variants and are still not sure whether a recent losing streak is caused by variants or bad trading. Take a step back.  The more experience you have the easier it is to make this determination. But if you're new, it can be very difficult especially if you tend to be critical of yourself.  Traders with the healthy mindset who are confident in their process. Have a much easier time dealing with losing streaks because they can confidently identify the cause as variance and move on.  Traders with the less healthy mindset or less confidence will tend to assume that a losing streak is the result of bad decisions and a lack of trading skill.  Alpha Traders with the solid process. And excellent risk management. Still hit losing streaks in the long run. A solid process will win. But in the short run, there's always going to be ups and downs due to variance. If you make money 50% a day, you Can expect to lose money 6 or 7 days in a row once in a while that's fine.  When you lose money, 6 days in a row and determine that it's simply because of variance. You need to double down on your process and believe in what you're doing more than ever variance, can be managed, but never controlled get comfortable with variance.  If you understand your Edge and can confidently, explain it, you'll be much more comfortable with variance. Furthermore, if you continually spend time thinking about the current regime and how to adapt to present market conditions, you will reduce your variance and maintain steadier performance over time.  No matter how good you are though, you'll still need to understand that variance is a thing.  Daily risk management.  Daily. Stop losses can be good for some styles of trading and counterproductive for others.  Daily stops work, best for very short-term day Traders. If your time Horizons, generally, 2 minutes, to 2 hours, Any square up your risk at the end of each day a daily stop-loss is probably right for you if you trade a 1-week Time. Horizon and often by short dated options, a daily stop-loss makes no sense.  For retail Traders, 1 of the simplest Risk Management Systems is to Simply multiply your free Capital by 1% every morning and risk that much and no more, then start fresh and do the same thing. Tomorrow, this increases your risk. As you make money, decreases it as you lose money and keeps you in the game. If you're new to trading and plan to trade short-term views, only I highly recommend this approach. It is extremely conservative, but not ridiculously conservative. It will keep you safe, but give you plenty of opportunity to succeed.  Daily stop losses are best for retail Traders, day Traders and Junior institutional Traders, but less useful for most institutional or macro Traders.  Daily stop-losses. Create a timing mismatch for Traders, whose time Horizon span. be on 1 day, they make it difficult to ride, impulsive multi-day moves,  Say you're a bank Trader. With a 250,000 stop-loss, a $1 million monthly, stop-loss and a 10 million dollar budget.  Some huge news comes out and it looks like a game-changer for Euro. You buy 50 million euros at 1:18 with a 50-point stop-loss risking 250,000 euro dollar, ribs, 50 Pips higher, 15 minutes and ends the day 100 Pips higher at 1119 0, you're up 500,000 on the day and think the move will continue.  You believe the logical stop is your original entry, minus 10 Pips, which is 11790 because you're a big fan of news, pivots and feel. If you're a dollar goes back below the news pivot, which was 1/18, where you bought, the news has been rejected,  If you go home long, you're a dollar with the stuff at 11790. Your total risk on the trade is just 50,000.  but if you get stopped out your daily, You know, tomorrow will be the 500,000 you made today. Plus the $1,000 loss which is 550,000.  That's way more than your daily stop of 250,000. So you either need to cut your risk. By more than half or you need to move your stop closer. This is the tricky part of marketing to Market each day,  Very often in a case like this, you'll see the trader. Simply put their stop 50 points or less away in order to stay below their daily limit. Instead of trading the market, they're trading their p&l inevitably. There's a 60-point dip overnight. The trader gets stopped out before Euro goes on a 400. 400 Point topside Rampage  On the other hand, if the trader limits match their time Horizon, there'll be no such problem. If this Trader is running with the 1 million dollar, monthly stop, they can trade the market. The way they believe it is meant to be traded. Knowing that, if all goes horribly wrong, all they lost was 50,000. They can get back on their horse and keep riding the next day.  The key with any. Risk management system is that it needs to match your free Capital, your trading style and your time Horizon.  Daily stops don't work with week-long ideas, monthly stops. Don't make much sense for day Traders other than as a backup or overlay to a daily stop-loss system.  Individual trade risk management.  Managing the risk of an individual trade starts with understanding what kind of trade it is. Is this a standard day trade, the type of trade you do almost every day or is this a super rare opportunity that comes around a few times per year?  Clearly, those 2 scenarios require a different position size and risk management approach.  Before I go through exactly how I choose position sizes. Let's talk about conviction first.  Conviction level is 1 of the critical inputs into sizing your position. Good Traders vary their bet size based on conviction that said. If your conviction on a trade idea is not somewhere between high and very high, you probably should not do the trade. Once you find a trade, you like and determine that your conviction is high, can you really extract a deeper level of granularity and determine what trades are somewhat high high or very high conviction. My experience suggests that most of the time you cannot  You're unlikely to be able to judge xanti which routine, day trades, or short-term swing trades, have a higher probability of success. On the other hand, there are some outlier trades that are clearly different from the norm, and will come with a higher level of conviction.  Most good Traders. Use some sort of tiered risk management system. The most common system involves 3 levels, a b, and c trades or 3 star 4-star. And 5-star trades are common ways of labeling conviction.  These systems are simple and they work but there's a fundamental error in most of these systems the increase in risk. As you move up the scale, is way too linear. I believe, risks should increase exponentially on super high. Conviction trades.  the reason is that almost All trades have similar conviction. When you do a day trade or trade, some lead leg relationship or execute against a pattern, you see at the equity open. Those are the bread and butter trades. You do all day every day,  my view is that attaching a finer granular. Determination of conviction or confidence level on those trades, is kind of pointless.  There is however an important exception once every 3 to 6 months, an unbelievably attractive trade comes along, and you should allocate much more Capital than usual to those trades.  I'm talking about those rare opportunities where the timing risk reward and probability of success, all come together in a highly unusual and attractive way.  The clearest examples of this can happen at a watershed moment for your asset Market.  for example, long hedge, Nick features in 2012 for economics the day, they add your favorite stock to the S&P 500 short, the Bitcoin bubble on the day features started trading in 2017  Short. Chesapeake stock. Where the market build it up even though they were bankrupt, these moments that are nearly once in a lifetime require a different approach there, can also be these super high probability trades that are less epic in terms of news flow, but where all the planets? Align,  For me, there are 3 levels of conviction.  Type 1 run-of-the-mill trade you would do on any given day your convictions high or you do not do the trade. This is not a rare opportunity. It's part of your regular process allocate 1% to 3% of your free Capital depending on your Edge experience, level and historical performance.  If you're new, keep to the 1% area newish, stick to 2% or below. And if you're comfortable with your process and know your success rate and statistics, well enough Venture up to 3%, Max  Type 2 high conviction. This is a trade where something unique is going on, but not a watershed moment or extremely rare event. Maybe the FED has turned hawkish after a period of Doubt or a stalk your expert. Has a meaningful change of narrative. A 3-year Trend in oil, looks ready to reverse. A Saudi Arabia has said, Nomas to production cuts.  Type 2 trades. Almost always involve a big narrative shift or some sort of significant dislocation. These are not routine trades. Allocated meaningful chunk of capital to the idea. Based on your predetermined parameters, 3% to 5% of free Capital generally makes sense, but if you're having an excellent year you may want to add 10% of your year to date profits on top.  The way you get outside upside with limited downside, is you reinvest profits, when excellent opportunities arise a type 2 Opportunity. At the start of the year is a bummer because you cannot invest Beyond 3% or maybe 5% Max of free capital on the other hand, if you're having a great year and it's only June, you can over bet the type 2 Opportunity, knowing if you're wrong, it's completely fine.  Let's say a high. Net worth individual has given you a hundred million dollars. Of capital to trade with instructions to shoot for 15% returns and a $1 million stop loss that is stopped trading. If you drop to 95 million,  On January 1, your free capital is 5 million. Your target is 15 million.  Your compensation is simple. You get paid. 20% of your p&l in cash once per year.  Now, it's June your p&l is + 11 million and a type 2 opportunity presents itself.  Remember free capital is your stop loss plus your year to date pnl. So free capital in the situation is the $5 million. Stop loss plus the 11 million year to date pnl which is 16 million.  Scenario.  The dollar has ripped higher over the past 6 months, as the FED hikes rates. Money is piling into the USA because of the attractive yield and you think the dollar is overvalued? The Long Dollar position is crowded, all your metrics and anecdotal evidence suggests. The market is Max long dollars. You want to sell the dollar but you're waiting for some sort of fundamental or at least technical Catalyst. Hopefully both  Today could be the day the dollar rips higher all morning rallying to a new year-to-date high in the hours before the FED meets. Everyone has added to their dollar Longs as consensus calls for a hawkish meeting. The feds likely to ratify Market expectations of at least 2 more rate hikes this year.  You're ready for anything, that sounds a bit dovish because that might be a catalyst for your reversal trade, which is short dollars.  229 and 45 seconds. 15 seconds to the FED announcement. Your palms are sweaty knees. Weak hands are heavy. You feel nervous. But on the surface you look calm and you're ready to sell dollars If the Fed moves to a more devastating.  2:30 p.m. Boom. The red headline. Hits Bloomberg Federal Reserve, says, current level of rates is appropriate and further, tightening unlikely to be warranted. Whoa, this is a major Change in the narrative and you want to get short dollars, the dollar gaps, higher lower, you get short some dollars and by the end of the day, the chart shows a massive key reversal off the new yearly High, and the fundamental story has completely changed. You plan to hold this position for a multi-day drop of around 4% in the dollar.  Now, you need to determine how much Capital to risk on the idea. It's not a once-in-a-lifetime trade but it's also clearly not a type 1. How do you decide how much to risk?  As a baseline, start with the simple high-end type 1 or low-end type 2 risk calculation.  That would be around, 3% of free Capital, free capital is 16 million. As I said, 3% of 16 million is 480,000. Okay, so that's a bare minimum but that's high. Type 1 risk, sizing, not type 2.  You get outside returns or right tail by making big bets when you're in a strong Capital position. You're more than 2/3 of the way to your yearly goal and it's only June type 2 opportunities are rare in this situation. A simple formula for type 2 is Type 2 risk. Equals 3% of free Capital plus 10% of year-to-date p&l.  In this case that's 480,000 plus 1.1 million, which is 1.58 million.  I like this formula it's simple, it's effective but you don't have to stick to it. Religiously think about how you'll feel. If you draw down that much is it going to kill you psychologically 11 million minus 1.58 million will take you to around 9 and a half million year to date.  That's still not too shabby and in my opinion that would be perfectly manageable.  This is a good starting point and you can always scale up or down from there. Depending on other factors such as how strongly you feel about the trade and how sensitive your manager is to large draw Downs.  this also depends somewhat on how loose, or Rotate. You are with defining trades as type 1, or type 2.  If you're finding yourself thinking, 2 trades per month or type 2 trades, you need to be more conservative. If you only find 4 or 5 type 2 trades per year, 3% of free Capital plus 10% of year to date is probably about, right?  Remember understand the metagame.  If you plan to take abnormally large risk on a trade, it never hurts to overcommit with your manager. If Management's used to seeing your daily p&l fluctuate plus or minus 300 K and you drop 1.5 million in 2 days that will generate some discomfort. The best strategy is to fire off a quick email saying you have a high conviction, trade idea and plan to risk more Capital than usual on it given your strong year to date and elevated confidence in the setup.  Managers hate surprises, whether you work at a bank hedge fund or other institution, my experience is that all managers prefer a Trader that overcomes Type 3 outlier opportunity.  This is a dislocation policy change, historic moment or economic event so large it Demands, a huge bet but only if you're in a strong position to make that outsized bet.  If you're down on the year or near your monthly stop-loss or near boss man's shoulder tap level, unfortunately, you just have to keep it small allocate type 1 or type 2 money and hope you're in a stronger position next time. But if you're in a strong Capital position, you should rationally assess. What is the most? You can invest in this idea, keep in mind, no matter how good the opportunity might seem, you could still be wrong, you could still lose money. In fact, some people believe there's a point on the confidence curve where you're more likely to lose money. That is you become overconfident.  No matter how great the opportunity you must remember that a your assessment of the probabilities may not be accurate and B you only get to run the experiment. Once you never bet more than you can afford to lose. Roulette wheel will sometimes come up green and you'll occasionally roll a 1 on a 20-sided die.  The point with these type 3 opportunities is that they can make your year, they can make your career and I think in general good Traders, know them when they see them.  if a Type 3 opportunity presents itself, think long and hard about the optimal bet size have courage go big  Here's a short excerpt from Stand drunken Miller's famous lost tree Club speech.  Quote, the only way to make long-term returns in our business that are superior, is by being a pig.  the first thing I heard, when I got in the business, not for my mentor was Bulls make money Bears, make money and pigs get slaughtered  I'm here to tell you. I was a pig and strongly believe the only way to make long-term returns in our business that are superior, is by being a pig.  I think diversification and all the stuff they're teaching at business school. Today is probably the most misguided concept everywhere end quote. Sparrows pigs, sharks snakes hedgehogs. Foxes Hawks doves owls, there's plenty of animals on Wall Street.  When a Type 3 trade comes along, and you're in a strong position, you need to take the most possible risk, that could mean, as much as 50% of your year to date pnl, depending on your risk management framework. And your role  I cannot tell you an exact formula because it depends too much on where you work and how you manage your risk. But start with the type 2 formula and then increase as much as possible. Without introducing any major path dependence problems.  In other words risk as much as you possibly can knowing you still might be wrong and you don't want to ruin the rest of your year by destroying your momentum? Yes. You want to be a pig in situations like this but you also always need to consider. You could be wrong.  Be like a call option.  I've created a simple graphic in the PDF to show you why it's important to structure your process so that you take more risk when you're doing well. Unless When you are not.  I show a p&l simulation for 3 traders, who start out with $100,000 risk, 3% of capital each day make money. 50% of days and their average pnl on winning days is 1.5 times the average p&l on a losing day.  Check out the chart in the PDF.  I add a factor representing how much of year-to-date penal each Trader risks on each trade. The zero Factor Trader risks, 3% each day, the 10% Factor Trader risks. 3% of free Capital plus 10% of the year to date pnl and the 20% Factor Trader risks. 3% of free Capital plus 20% of year to date.  You can see the downside similar for all 3 Traditions, a bad year is going to be around. This is because of the trader struggling, they reduce risk and all 3 methodology  Well, a great year. For the zero Factor Trader is more like dollars more upside with that more downside. Nice.  Now, why not go to 50% or 100% of year to date, then?  In an experiment with unlimited time and infinite trials, higher percentages are best but in real life where you only get to live each year, once lower numbers are preferable.  Higher numbers, introduce unacceptable levels of variance. Even 20% is very high. I'm just using it to make the point and show you how the average annual returns vary. As you tweak, your risk factor higher. This is a toned down version of the Kelly Criterion at work.  The Kelly Criterion is a formula used by gamblers to calculate optimal bet size. Using the Kelly Criterion leads to higher wealth. Compared to any other bet sizing strategy in the long run.  The Kelly Criterion relies on known odds and so it's not directly applicable to trading because the probability of winning or losing in trading, can only be Loosely estimated it. Not directly observable. Still the concept behind the Kelly Criterion is directly applicable to trading and risk management even if the precise mathematics are not.  For an entertaining book that includes plenty of information about the Kelly Criterion check out fortunes formula by William Poundstone. It's a great book.  As you make money, you take more risk as you lose. You, take less. This is the core of how you behave like a call option. Over the years, a hedge fund or trading business with a bunch of Traders, all behaving. This way, will have low downside volatility with a ton of upside  When I suggest you allocate 1% to 3% of your free Capital to type 1 trades, this assumes, you have only 1 trade on at a time. If you have more than 1 trade on, you need to very carefully assess the correlation of the trades and the probability that they could all go wrong at the same time.  That's why fewer trades equals better trading equals lower transaction costs. Equals easier risk management. Generally when I have more than 1 type 1 trade on, at the same time, I just treat them all as 1 trade, for risk management purposes.  In other words, I size my position. So that if every single 1 got stopped out, I will not lose more than 3% of my free capital.  Life is much easier if you trade 1 position at a time or treat. All your positions as 1 risk management blob.  If you try to take on more risk and start assuming correlation between different trades, you might suddenly wake up 1 morning down 8% of free Capital because the correlations didn't work out the way you thought they would.  Furthermore, do you want to be an investor or a Trader?  If you have 14 line items you are portfolio manager or an investor but not really a Trader. Do you have 14 good ideas at 1 time? Probably not do you have 7 good ideas at 1 time again probably not focus on 1 or 2 strong ideas and monetize them. Concentrate your beds in the place. You think you have the most Edge and Highest conviction spreading bets around is a recipe for higher transaction costs. Lazy risk, management, diluted returns and correlation confusion.  The big takeaway from this section is that when an epic Watershed trade comes along and you're in a strong Capital position, it's time to go all in  All in does not mean, you risk your job or risk your fund. It means risk. The maximum possible with the parameters. You have set play tight when you're weak, play, extremely aggressively when you're strong and the opportunity is exceptional.  Huge opportunities do not come along all that often jump on them.  Good trading takes courage.  Position sizing.  1 of the most common questions I get from New Traders, is how do you size your positions for me? The answer is pretty simple. Here are the 5 Steps 1. You have a trade idea. Let's say, you think bonds are going to sell off in the days, leading up to non-farm payrolls. That is the jobs report. Because the market is massively long, everyone's been super bullish for months, and the whisper number for the jobs. Number is creeping higher and higher in recent days.  This is a classic run-up trade as described in the previous chapter.  You've decided the best way to trade. This is to buy TBT the ultra Short Bond Market ETF.  While TBT is not a good way to short the bond market for more than a day or 2. Your time Horizon is just 2 days so you've decided this will be the easiest most liquid and levered way to execute the trade.  2.  Determine your conviction level.  You think this is a classic run-up trade and you love a good run-up trade.  You decide, this is a type 2 trade, which this month means. 250,000 of risk. Would normally be allocated to this idea.  3 decide how much to risk you're up 1 million dollars this year and have a particularly strong feeling about this trade. The chart setup is Was great too. So you can take a huge position.  Since you plan to cover the trade before the non-farm payrolls release, you don't have to worry about Gap risk through the number.  You decide to risk the standard 250,000 plus. 10% of your year to date p&l of $1 million. So you're risking 250,000 plus 100,000, which is 350,000 on this trade?  4, determine the stop loss.  Use technical analysis and other inputs like average, daily range expected, volatility. And an understanding of round number bias to determine the stop loss on the trade.  You have a rule that you always place your stop at least 1, average, day's range away from your entry point. This is a good rule of thumb for new Traders. If I know absolutely nothing about a security. The first thing I do when looking to put in a stop-loss is calculate the Securities average daily range, any stop-loss closer than 1 day's range away is at High Risk of getting dinged by short-term noise.  5 determine the position size to make the math. Easy, let's say TBT is trading at 100 and you've determined after looking at the charts and studying the volatility of tbt that the appropriate stop-loss is 97.98.  Liquidity is excellent and slippage is not an issue. You estimate 3 sets of slippage on your stop. So you're risking 2 dollars a share and you decided in step 3 to risk 350,000  Now, here's how you calculate the correct sizing.  Position size is the dollars. You're going to risk divided by the entry point, minus the stop. So in this case 350,000 divided by 2.05, which is 170,731  Therefore, the trader in this example should buy 170,731 shares of tbt. The formula for determining position size is always the same.  Position size equals dollars at risk divided by entry point. Minus stop-loss.  Let's do 1 more just to make sure it's clear.  I'm a retail Trader. I want to sell Aussie dollar because reasons.  The currency pair is trading at 0.75 0 right now. And after studying the pairs volatility and doing 20 minutes of technical analysis, I've determined that 0.75%.  My trading account balance is currently 165,000. I always risk 2% of capital on every trade. I never run more than 1, trade at a time. So this is a safe way to run my account.  I'll add 3 Pips To My stop-loss Level to allow for slippage on execution.  2% of 165,000 is 3,300, so that's my normal risk unit. So my position size is 33. 00, divided by the entry point. Minus the stop-loss, in this case, my stop-loss is 0.007 or 75 Pips.  When you divide 3,300 by 0.075, you get 440,000. So our short position in Aussie dollar should be 440,000 Aussie. If we get stopped out we'll lose 3,300, which is 2% of capital.  Bad Traders work in the opposite direction. They say, I'm short 2 million, Aussie at 75, but I can't afford to lose more than 10 grand. So my Stop's going to be 75.50.  this makes no sense because 7,550 is a totally arbitrary level that does not take Market factors like volatility or technical analysis into consideration,  Always start with dollars at risk, then determine your stop-loss by analyzing the market. The position size is the output not the input.  To summarize the 5 Steps. I just explained. You have a trade idea.  2, determine your conviction, level 3, decide how much to risk the amount to risk can be in dollars or basis points. Depending where you work, the amount is determined by your conviction level year to date. Pnl and your risk management system 4, determine your stop-loss using technical analysis and other inputs 5. Do the math to back out the correct position size.  Using this methodology your position size can vary. Substantially a low conviction position with a wide stop loss for a good hedge fund trade. Might be 20 million Aussie while a high conviction trade with a tighter, stop for the same Trader. Could be 200, million, Aussie, good Traders, vary. Bet size, good Traders, Barry bet size,  Good Traders. Barry bet size whenever you see a Trader that always trades in a thousand share, Lots or 10 million dollar FX positions, there's a good chance, they don't know what they're doing.  Alternatively, some Traders. Are able to vary their position size to a point, but hit a plateau above, a certain amount of risk, they feel uncomfortable and dial it back, even if that's not the optimal sizing, keep an eye out for plateaus like this in your training.  If you tend to top out at a specific risk level, even when you know, your capital and risk management system, allow you to take more risk, figure out why?  The best Traders have the largest variation in bad size, a great Trader might trade lower conviction, size of a thousand shares of Apple early. In the year then 15,000 shares of Apple. By summer when she has high conviction and a big chunk of p&l to work with  Let me clarify something important here, when I talk about increasing your risk. As your p&l grows, I'm not saying you keep doubling down until you bust. There's a bias known as the house money effect, in which studies show that Traders and gamblers, treat money. They've won differently for money. They started out with. If you start the night at a casino with a 100 bucks and now you have $100. To incremental dollars feels different than the initial 100. It's free money.  Studies show that gamblers treat house money with less respect and are more likely to gamble. It away recklessly don't do that, that's not what I'm recommending.  What I'm talking about is a methodical increase in Risk, appetite as your bank. Roll grows, this is like the Kelly Criterion in sports gambling, as your bankroll and your Edge grow. You should take more risk as your bank. Roll an edge fall, you should take less risk.  No, be on the lookout for the house money effect. When you're up huge on the day, do you trade sloppier? Many people do.  I do systematic increases in Risk, appetite as capital increases are completely different from Winter's tilt and the house money effect. Make sure you understand the difference.  The evolution of expected value over the life of a trade.  There's a particularly tricky Concept in the mathematics of trading. Which is that the risk reward of a given trade changes as prices move.  An example is, if you have a trade where you are, risking 1% to make 2% and then it quickly moves 1.5% in your favor. At that point the question is are you now risking 2 and a half percent to make 0.5% unattractive? Or do you ignore the mark to Market and stick with your original plan? The answer is not obvious, most people respond that you should Mark to Market because the current market price is the only thing that matters. The problem with this approach is that you'll never let your trades, run to the take-profit.  Because the risk reward is so bad. Once the trade moves more than halfway toward the take-profit level,  If you're risking 1 to make 2 but then you always take profit when it moves 1 and a half. Your risk-reward ratio was never 1 to 2. It was 1 to 1.5  even worse. If you get nervous, when it's just moved 1% you take profit and then your trading system is just risking 1 to make 1 decision. For the finish line is before you start the race.  1 way to deal with. This is to remove your stop-loss higher as the trade moves deeper in the money. This is generally logical, but introduces, more noise risk because a random pullback might knock you out when the trade would have been safe under the original parameters.  The most effective way to Trail. Your stop is to use a moving average that matches the trend and update your stop-loss once every 12 or 24 hours, there's no correct answer here. But my general feeling is that if you put a trade on risking 1 to make 2, you cannot take profit all the time. Once you make 1.4 because that means, your original plan, was not really true and your risk reward on every trade is much worse than you think. It is on Inception. You're putting on a trade with a certain plan in mind and then moving the goalposts once the trade moves in the money.  Either Trail your stop-loss higher in a systematic way while still giving the trade plenty of room to breathe or take partial profits at predetermined levels. Trailing the stop systematically breaks. The rule of setting stops based on technical analysis and Market logic, which is not ideal  But you can always fine-tune, whatever stop-loss the system spits out by looking at a few charts. What you should not do, is cut every trade early because quote, the risk reward sucks. Now end quote.  That is a logical fallacy. That ignores the original structure of the trade and ignores, the fact that a core skill and successful trading is the ability to find trades, that offer substantially more reward than risk. Don't truncate your right tail all the time. Trying to extract the last 20% of a trade may cause you to give back all your gains. That's just the way it is. That's just Trading.  As an FYI, this discrepancy between actual payout on trades and forecast payout happens all the time, and it's something you need to monitor. If you're structuring, all your trades, risking 1 to make 3. But then you cut everything early because you get antsy or bored or risk averse, or looking for excuses to reduce Your risk reward is not 1 to 3, might be 1 to 2 or Worse monitor this.  This is frequently an issue in options trading too. Often, you'll see an exotic option like a reverse knockout that pays something like 8 to 1, but the only way for it to pay off that way, is if the option expires exactly 1 basis point away from the barrier, that's totally unrealistic. If you're buying low Delta digital options at 8%, because they look like juicy leverage, but then you sell them every time. Once they double to 16%, you might have been better off trading, a simpler more liquid structure.  If you're structuring trades for maximum leverage, make sure you get the leverage. You thought you were getting  sticking to the plan.  There's always a tension between sticking to the plan and adjusting to new information. The problem with adjusting to new information is that a substantial percentage of the information you received in a given. Trading day is noise, some days are 100% noise, your predisposition, once you have a Trade on should always be to do nothing. Leave it alone and follow your original plan.  Plans are generally made in a rational State of Mind adjustments. On the Fly are often emotional and biased reactions to the non-stop onslaught of stimulus.  Prices are almost always changing. New information is arriving constantly. Most of it is meaningless. If you have a trade on, stick to the original plan, tell there is new information. You cannot possibly ignore  That is assumed new information is mostly noise and react only. When there is an unambiguous signal some Traders, impose a restrictive rule to avoid overtrading. For example, once I put on a trade, I'll reevaluate it once per day at 11:00 a.m. otherwise I'll leave it till the stop or the take-profit trigger.  This avoids, the problem of sitting there staring at the screen as a dumb voices in your head say stuff like it's training, heavy. Maybe I should get out. Ooh, the headlines make me nervous. This trade goes south, I'll be down. On the months look a squirrel.  Know your default mode.  Part of this calculus is knowing your own default mode Network.  The default mode Network or dmn is a cognitive science concept research shows that there's a particular part of your brain that becomes active when you're not busy thinking about anything in particular.  This is also known as wakeful rest.  This area tends to have the same thoughts over and over. These are the thoughts you Circle back to when you're not thinking about anything.  Mendel Kalin suggests. We think of the mind like a hill covered in fresh snow.  Each thought is a sled that slides down that Hill leaving a trail.  The more sleds that slide down those same Trails the deeper those Trails become and the more difficult it becomes to avoid sliding into the same repetitive thought patterns.  What are your default modes?  when there's a trading mode, how do you typically Think what is the action? You default to when you have a trade on and you're sitting in front of the screen, what is your default mode?  Do you generally want to add to the position or cut it? Or are you fine to wait patiently and let it simmer until it's ready?  Become familiar with your default, Dot, and action patterns. And think about whether they are destructive, whether they add to, or subtract from your process, and whether they lead to productive or sub-optimal actions, when you're not busy at work, where does your mind go? Is it a positive or negative place? Are your typical thoughts constructive, or self-critical? Do they encourage action or inaction? Does your dmn help you or hurt you? How do you break the bad habits?  1, part of my default mode is to scan through charts and think about random Market related ideas, that's a positive and productive dmn. I default to thinking things like hmm, vix has dropped 3 days in a row. Is that bullish for stocks or I wonder what? And soybeans are doing. I haven't checked the self- Commodities in a while, or when's the next rbnz meeting?  I also default to tossing around ideas for upcoming editions of AMF, my daily macro newsletter, I add them to a word doc, a future ideas. These are all productive, default mode Network actions,  The negative part of my default mode is a strong and steady urge to press the buy and sell buttons. I always want to put on or add to positions whenever markets, slow down and enter a quieter intraday phase. I find myself tempted to increase my position size.  I should be doing nothing because unnecessary increases in position size often lead to sub-optimal risk management scenarios if price goes the wrong way.  This default mode is such an own part of who I am that my manager, Pete once wrote reduce on a sticky note and stuck it to the bottom right corner of 1, of my monitors.  Anyone who knows? Me has a Trader knows. My positions are either the right size. Or too big almost. Never too small. This is not good.  The reduced sign helped to be maintain awareness of my default mode, which is a subconscious desire to increase risk even when there's no reason to do. So it helps me keep my hands off the buy and sell buttons when there's no logical action to be taken.  Alpha Traders, hold 2 contradictory skills at once they can sit there and do nothing for long periods, and they can act aggressively without hesitation. Most people can do 1, but struggle with the other I'm great at acting with without hesitation. But I'll always be working on my patients.  Listen to your default thoughts when your mind is quiet and determine if they are beneficial or toxic for what it's worth, this is a useful exercise to run outside of trading too.  Do the default voices in your head criticize or motivate you? Do they spur you toward action or convince you to procrastinate?  I believe that navigating the cacophony of competing voices in your head and choosing which ones to or and which ones to listen to is 1 of the most important determinants of survival and success in both trading and in life  shutting out the toxic voices and following the beneficial ones is the definition of conscientiousness willpower and discipline.  It is also the primary purpose of meditation, and mindfulness exercises.  When you have a choice to either watch TV or go lift weights there are 2 competing voices that go something like this voice 1, you'll feel great. If you go out all you need to do is get up the couch and voice 2 interrupting South Park is on the really funny 1 from 2006. Their sour cream and onion Ruffles in the cupboard.  Your health and fitness will be determined by which voice you listen to same thing in trading the voices are there too? For example, you slowly piece together, a strong trade idea, execute and write down your plan, stop loss and take profit level.  You like the trade idea and you have a clear plan, then half an hour. Or later the voices. Start voice 1. Why hasn't it moved by now? This idea must be wrong. You should get out. Last thing we want to do is lose money on a voice to interrupting. You are so cold right now. Like article like cucumber, cold. You should just voice 1 interrupt day. Wait, it's rallying. Now double your position.  It's remarkable that even the smartest people in the world have these dumb voices in their head. It's all part of the fun of being, a human being ignore the negative voices, and slowly tune. Your default mode Network to think, stick to the plan, stick to the plan, stick to the plan.  Treat it like a mantra. Stick to the plan. Stick to the plan.  When that dumb voice in your head tries to steer you towards the Rocks, throw it off the boat. Stick to the plan, stick to the plan.  But you can't always stick to the plan. Of course, there are times when you should abandon your plan and get out of Dodge, like a commercial pilot, stick with the flight plan as long as humanly possible. But change course in the face of major new information.  A good example of when it makes sense to deviate from plan, is if a trade has moved substantially in your favor, just before a market moving event like economic data, central bank meeting, and so on.  You don't want to risk a major portion of your capital on a coin toss, especially when you know, there's Gap and liquidity risk around big events unless you have a strong view on the outcome of a particular economic event. It usually makes sense to lighten up on risk beforehand.  That said, if you trade plan was solid, you probably saw that event coming and considered it in your trade. Plan upcoming catalysts, should always be reassessment triggers.  All right, that concludes chapter 11 I hope you now have a solid understanding of how I think about risk. I hope you can use some of these tactics and fold. Some of my ideas into your process. I could say this a hundred times and it would not be enough. The number 1 rule of Trading is avoid ruin.  Before we hit chapter 12, let's take a little detour here to talk about Jesse Livermore and the Book reminiscences of a stock operator.  A quick book review kind of thing.  Reminiscences of a stock. Operator, is a quintessential and slightly misunderstood piece of trading literature. This 1923 classic is a slightly fictionalized biography of Jesse Livermore written by Edward, Lefevre.  Livermore was a famous Speculator and Bobby. Axelrod Styles, celebrity rich guy. The book is epic entertainment and full of all kinds of cool, trading, wisdom and Nifty old-timey. Wall Street jargon like tape reading and bucket shops.  It's also a cautionary tale, and a case study in overtrading fed discipline, poor money management, and the Dark Side of trading.  Livermore, often celebrated as a genius and as 1 of the great, speculators of all time went bankrupt, 3 times and eventually Committed suicide in the cloak room of the Sherry Netherland Hotel in New York City.  By all accounts. He was an incredible Trader with fatal flaws.  An interesting fact that tells me he was a classy guy each time. He declared bankruptcy. He would borrow a small stake from a friend so he could start trading again. Then he'd Build It Up substantially eventually making himself Rich again.  Once he was fully liquid, he would pay back all the creditors he owed from before, he declared bankruptcy.  He did this even though he was clear of the debts and was not legally required to repay. Thanks to the bankruptcy proceeding, he just paid people back because it was the right thing to do.  Here are some of my favorite quotes from the book with a bit of my own commentary sprinkled in.  Quote fear and hope remain the same. Therefore the study of the psychology of speculators is as valuable As It Ever Was weapons change. But strategy remains strategy on the New York Stock Exchange as on the battlefield. I think the clearest summing up of the whole Thing was expressed by Thomas F Woodloch. When he declared  The principles of successful stock speculation are based on the supposition that people will continue in the future to make the mistakes. They have made in the past end quote.  In other words, this time is not different.  Quote a stock operator has to fight a lot of expensive enemies within himself and quote.  In other words, learning the rules, is easy. Following them is hard, self-awareness is key.  Quote, 1 of the most helpful things that anybody can learn is to give up trying to catch the last 8th or the first. These 2 are the most expensive AIDS in the world end quote.  In other words, it feels so good when you sell the ding-dong Highs are by the ding-dong lows, but it's not something that can be done on a regular basis. Don't bother trying.  Quote.  It takes a man, a long time. To learn all the lessons of all his mistakes. They say there are 2 sides to everything, but There's only 1 side to the stock market, and is the bull side or the bare side, but the right side, it took me longer to get that General principle. Fixed firmly in my mind.  I also was better equipped than the average customer of Harding Brothers in that I was utterly free from speculative prejudices the bare side, doesn't appeal to me any more than the bull side or vice versa. My 1 stead prejudiced is against being wrong end, quote,  In other words, be nimble.  Good Traders are flexible and are not biased toward a pretty particular direction. In any Market. I often ask people who work for some of the legends of trading what qualities? Make that Trader. So successful just about every time the answer includes something like, he's happy to change his mind very quickly or he can be Max short 1 day at Max long. The next  Bad Traders are Perma something. Good Traders are intellectually flexible, strong opinions, weakly held.  quote, another lesson I learned early is that there's Nothing new in Wall Street. There can't be because speculation is as old as the hills, whatever happens in the stock market, today has happened before and will happen again. End quote,  In other words, as the Bible, says, the thing that hath been it is that which shall be and that which is done. Is that which shall be done. And there is no new thing under the sun  Quote what beat me was not having brains enough to stick to my own game. That is to play the market. Only, when I was satisfied, that presidents favored, my play, there is a Plane full who does the wrong thing at all times everywhere. But there is also the Wall Street pool, who thinks he must trade all the time.  No, man can have adequate reasons for buying or selling stocks daily or sufficient knowledge to make his play and intelligent play.  End quote.  #Overtrading.  Quote, no sir. Nobody can make big money on what someone else tells him to do and End quote. In other words trade your own View.  Quote, if you do not know who you are, the stock market is an expensive place to find out.  And quote.  I love this 1. It reminds me of a famous educator quote win or lose everybody gets what they want out of the market.  Quote.  I was nearly 27 years old. I had been at the game 12 years but the first time I traded because of a crisis that was still to come. I found that I'd been using a telescope between my first glimpse of the storm cloud and the time for cashing in on The Big Break stretch was evidently so much greater than I thought that I began to wonder whether I really saw what I thought I saw. So clearly  we had had many warnings and Sensational ascensions and call money rates. Still some of the great financiers talked, hopefully at least to newspaper reporters and the ensuing rallies in the stock market gave the lie to the Calamity howlers. Was I fundamentally wrong in being bearish or merely temporarily. And having begun to sell shorts. So soon end quote.  That quote, rang particularly true in 2007. When the market sniffed out a financial Calamity, very early on, but many Traders were too early to the trade and got shoulder-tapped before they could capitalize for every Legend Of The Big Short winners. There were 2 or 3 Bears who committed too big too early and lost as they were forced to stop out near the highs. You only hear the stories of those who survived  Quote, I did precisely the wrong thing. The cotton showed me a loss and I kept it. The wheat, show me a profit and I sold it out of all the speculative blenders. There are few greater than trying to average a losing game. Always sell what shows you a loss. And keep. What shows you a profit end quote? In other words, cut your losses, run your winners.  quote, the game taught me the game and it didn't spare the rod while teaching end, quote,  The best way to learn about the psychology of trading is to experience. That's mind-numbing losses. As my boss. Once told me after a particularly bad day of trading, you don't learn anything when you win,  You are now about 79% of the way through this audio book. I hope you feel most of what you've heard so far makes sense and you see how you can incorporate some of my techniques into your process.  In the next chapter, I'll go step by step through my process using many of the concepts and tactics described to this point. I hope to take all this disparate information and bring it together so you can see the entire trade selection and execution process from start to finish.  Chapter 12, bringing it all together, the life cycle of a trade from idea to execution to exit.  The preceding chapters have covered a wide range of topics in this chapter. I will bring it all together as I walk you through. Through my real world thought process and detail the life cycle of a trade from start to finish.  Chapter 9 introduced some questions. People frequently ask me like where do trade ideas come from? How do you come up with ideas? Where do you start? What is the process?  My Philosophy has always been about combining as many disciplines as possible in an effort to narrow down and filter out ideas with the hope of discovering the rare trade, where all the planets are aligned.  Many factors contribute to good trade ideas. They are not born from a simple chart pattern or single bit of fundamental analysis.  As mentioned earlier, I use fundamentals and micro structure to come up with most of my ideas. Then I use other disciplines like technical analysis sentiment, and cross market analysis to filter, and enhance the idea and optimized execution.  In the PDF, I present a visual that details the essentials of my process from start to finish.  I will use this visual to walk you through. How I come up with, execute risk manage and analyze my trades?  We'll start with generic explanations of each step each box in the table in the visual. And then I'll walk through a real life trade that I did recently to show you how it all works in real life.  Generally the process flows through the table from left to right? And top to bottom  Keep in mind that this table and the explanations that follow are a general framework. There are times when you may be doing this in a different order or in your head or in a less formal way. For example, while this grid is laid out as a Ready. Aim, Shoot type of process when it comes to headlines. My framework is more like ready shoot aim.  As discussed in chapter 4.  There's not enough time to think everything through when a headline comes out. So I allow myself to react as quickly as possible and execute the trade right away.  Then once I have the trade on, I go back through the remaining steps in the grid to make sure that my logic and risk. Management our sound. If they are not I quickly exit the trade or recalibrate my plan.  This is less risky. If you are experienced and deeply engaged in the markets, that is have a strong knowledge of the narrative and an intuitive feel for volatility and weak side, strong side of the market without having to think about it much.  Ready. Shoot, aim is not recommended for noobs.  Take a look at the table in the PDF and we'll go through it step by step.  In case you're in the car or you don't have the PDF in front of you. Let me just give you the main headings so you can follow along, 1 idea, generation 2, filtering 3, tactics, 4 position, sizing 5 execution,  6 tracking and 7 performance analysis.  1 idea, generation.  The number 1 way, I come up with trade ideas is by surfing the narrative. I explain this fully in chapter 9 I hope you have a sense of what I mean by now.  Surfing the narrative before. You can come up with the trade idea in your Market. You need to be an expert on the narrative that drives. It, this narrative is an evolving story that drives price over time and can often be comprised of 1, major narrative, along with multiple smaller, narratives vying for attention  Rarely Will the Market Embrace 2 major narratives at once that is too complicated. Usually 1 narrative dominates. And the remaining narratives hum in the background waiting to potentially emerge as important drivers.  When you understand the narrative in your Market, you have taken the first and most important step toward becoming an expert Trader. The evolution of the narrative is 1 of the major sources of trade ideas and can be a tremendous help even if you are a very short-term Trader.  For example, if you're a short-term Trader, you cannot possibly trade a new headline unless you fully understand what it means. Let's say your main Market is gold. Its Summer of 2020, you're short. A decent sized position in Gold. Futures risking 3% of your capital, a red headline, hits Bloomberg,  Gold Imports by India, more than doubled to 35.5 tons in August.  What does that mean? Is it bullish or bearish or meaningless? If you're an expert in Gold? You know whether the market cares about physical demand out of India right now and you know what was expected and what is normal for Indian? Gold Imports in August often. The answer may be nobody cares that headlines around.  On the other hand, the market might be worried about Indian demand because so many weddings have been canceled due to co 19.  If speculators were worried that the only demand was institutional and ETF demand, this number might be highly reassuring and could trigger a $10 rally in Gold. You need to know if you're an expert in your Market, you know what matters? And you know, what doesn't, you know, what your Market is trading off, and what it is not and then as the narrative changes, and New information comes in, you can react faster and smarter than others ride the price, to the new equilibrium and get off as it overshoots.  Over time, this knowledge of the narrative will inevitably lead you to trade ideas, you'll feel the winds, change direction before, others and you'll jump on the term before prices move, you may identify a new narrative before others. Catch the impulsive middle, part of a strong Trend or smell that an existing narrative is stale crowded and ready to turn.  if you're still struggling to see how you can follow the narrative and come up with trade ideas, the walk through in chapter 12, should help  For now, just remember that as you continuously study the narrative in your market and rise to expert level, you gain valuable intuition and insight into what matters. And what does not you? Get a feel for what is in the price and what is not, you understand which Catalyst will move the market and which will not  Beyond understanding The Narrative as described in chapter 9. There are 3 other primary ways that come up with trade ideas. Note that generally I have more than 1 reason. For a trade part of the filtering process is to make sure that wherever your idea comes from originally. It's supported by the narrative sentiment positioning, technicals correlated markets and seasonals we want ideas that are supported by multiple types of analysis but also please remember there's no such thing as a perfect trade.  In trading and in life, the Quest for Perfection is commendable. But the expectation that the world any situation or any trade will be perfect is flawed  You need to know when you reached good enough or you will wait forever for the perfect trade, perfect spouse or perfect job.  Now, this doesn't mean you settle for a crappy relationship or put on subpar trades. It means you must have the wisdom to understand that life is not meant to be perfect. Perfection is rare and fleeting and anything. Perfect. Should come as a positive. Of surprised not as an expectation.  As the Italian proverb made famous by. Voltar says, perfect, is the enemy of good  This applies to self-evaluation too many Traders, spend way too much time beating themselves up, unless you finish the day at the ding-dong highs in your p&l, you'll always wish you took profit earlier or had a bigger position or did something a little different.  Assess your performance, rationally, set high standards but do not expect Perfection from yourself or every day will be disappointment.  We need to do a good job. Be proud, don't niggle away at small performance glitches when you have generally run well this is draining and pointless.  Once you understand the narrative, you're in a strong position to trade news and events as you will understand their meaning and how they might disrupt or transform, the prevailing story.  News and events.  News and events can be a tremendous source of Edge and trade ideas. If you understand, the current equilibrium, and are familiar with the mind of the market and what information and events led to the current pricing that when new info arrives, you are a ninja events like company, earnings fomc, meetings, other Central Bank, meetings product announcements, economic data and unexpected headlines are opportunities for the fastest most informed traders to capitalize on mispricing  Prices, do not find their happy place right away. When new info arrives, there's a period of fast Market action, as hundreds of humans and algorithms disagree, on fair market, value and trade aggressively against each other.  Until a few winners emerge and trading eventually settles at a new price.  Often these waves of intense trading are when you can enter a state of flow and capture outsized, gains, these moments of In the Zone trading sometimes lasts just 10 or 15 minutes but can account for an entire week of p&l.  Identify events in your Market. Educate yourself. Read every preview and every word of pregame analysis, create a clear plan when the news event or announcement happens attack.  In 2 events flat equals strong. I don't always have the discipline to do this, but I try to go into major economic and Central Bank events as close to Flat as possible. If you're a short-term news Trader, this should be your approach. Here are 3 reasons. It is suboptimal to hold positions into events. 1 Gap risk. Quite often you won't get out as fast as you want, and you'll lose more money than you thought you would. You can't properly control risk in a gaping Market 2. You are biased. If you go into a Fed meeting short dollars because you think they're going to be dovish, your interpretation of the news release and press conference are likely to be biased. You'll be looking for headlines that confirm your prior davish view, instead of looking at the outcome through Clear Eyes  flat is the most powerful position in trading because It is the only time you are fully and completely unbiased 3. It's hard to flip if you're wrong.  If your position for a dovish outcome and the result is hawkish you want to flip from short dollars to Long dollars, this is difficult because 1 you will react slower when you are biased and leaning the wrong way. And 2 liquidity is not unlimited. If you have a decent sized short dollar position, you may have trouble buying enough dollars to flip long at a reasonable price.  It is easier to react to events than it is to predict them as a rule, if you are fast and well, prepared, the Sharpe ratio of reacting to events is higher than the sharp of trying to predict them.  As discussed last chapter, a big part of successful trading is to understand the current price. And then when new information appears react smarter and faster than your competitors, before the market finds a new equilibrium.  If you are flat, when new information comes out, you're stronger, faster and unbiased. You don't always need to have a position. Good Traders. Know when to be flat.  Although, predicting the outcome of an event, often has very little Edge predicting. What the market will do in the days, leading up to the event, can be a good source of trade ideas. Instead of trying to predict what everyone else is predicting the event itself. Smart Traders can often more easily forecast, what the crowd will do into the event and position ahead of the crowd before it starts to move.  The run-up trade.  The run-up trade is a phenomenon where prices move in a logical and predictable Direction. In the days, leading up to a major event.  These run-up trades are often easier to predict and monetize than the events that follow.  The idea behind the run-up trade is to identify an upcoming Market event. And then estimate what Traders will do before the event, if Apple earnings are coming up this week, which way are Traders likely to play it if non-farm payrolls are a few days from now, what might the market do in the days, leading up to The release the run-up trade is usually a function of 3 things.  1 positioning, medium-term. Traders investors and systematic strategies tend to reduce risk into major events.  They do this because volatility tends to be higher and more difficult to predict through events.  If their sizing, their bets using forecast volatility, which most do because that makes sense. They need to reduce their exposure as high ball events near. If everyone's long expect prices to fall in the run-up to the day of the event,  2, what is the obvious trade? Quite often, the obvious trade works. Plus Traders, feel stupid, missing obvious macro catalysts, so they will tend to position for them in advance. Then take them off quickly, if they do not materialize.  If the US economy has been hot. The FED is thinking about hiking rates, and most indicators point to strong job growth. Expect bonds to sell off in the days, leading up to the jobs report. As Traders, get set. For a blockbuster figure.  And 3. What is the lotto ticket trade?  If a biotech company is announcing Phase 1 results on Friday morning and it looks like a good result could cause a stock to Triple while a bad result will cause it to drop 20% expect the stock to Rally into the news. Even if the probability of a positive outcome does not justify the trade from an expected value. Point of view.  Asymmetrical bets will always attract speculators even if they are bad trades with good Optics.  So the run-up trade ahead of an event will be driven by speculators putting on lotto tickets beforehand.  Sometimes, all 3 factors will apply and that's a top quality run-up trade.  When you catch a run-up trade, you'll be tempted to keep it through the event because you have a nice cushion by that point resist that Temptation. It's often easier to forecast The Madness of crowds going into an event than it is to forecast, the outcome of the event itself. Furthermore, The very fact that you cut the run-up trade means, the security has moved a fair bit already into the event and thus, it is probably getting crowded in that direction and offers asymmetric risk reward in a bad way.  Everybody's bearish, but nobody's short.  Sticking with the topic of events. There's a more subtle way that upcoming events can influence markets often when a major risk event is coming up, Risk, Managers and Traders lean on the conservative side until it is out of the way due to Gap risk. And concerns about extreme volatility. They reduce their risk as the event nears, regardless of their View.  Once the event passes regardless of the result risk appetite returns to normal and a move that probably should have happened before the event happens afterwards, speculators put on the trade, they wanted to have before because now that the event and Associated Gap risk is out of the way, it's safe to do so.  This is 1 of my favorite setups. When there's a strong consensus view but no positioning to match the view you often see, highly impulsive moves once the event passes. The consensus move is free to unfold at high speed, often the event itself contains. No new information. It's simply the passing of the event. And thus, the elimination of Gap risk that allows the move that should have happened earlier to happen. Now, this setup is powerful and has a high expected value. So watch for it.  Deviation from fair value.  Another important source of trade ideas is scanning for moments when your Market deviates, from fair value,  Fair value is a slippery concept and is almost impossible to measure with certainty. So when I say fair value, I mean loose or best estimate of fair value,  You never know what the real fair value of a market is. But you know, that if oil drops 2 dollars and copper drops 5% at the same time, fair value for the Canadian dollar has Pro Probably just gone down. Not  Up, I tend to think of fair value, more in terms of Direction and not level. That is, I might say, today's economic data was bad and oils down 4% today. Yields look way too high, but I would never say given these numbers and the movement oil, I think, 10 year yields should be 1.1% not 1.2%.  1 way to measure, deviations from fair, value is to use cross Market correlation. This is explained in chapter 9,  Start by identifying 1 or 2 markets, that should logically be correlated to the market. You trade follow them. You don't need to create a sophisticated regression model to track deviations and movements. Just check momentum in the correlated markets, and get a feel for what it means. For the market, you trade  over time. You'll slowly learn to watch other markets for Clues and you'll experience. How lead lag trading can give you a forecasting Edge.  Lead lag or cross market trading is not just about watching 1 market move. Higher than buying the other Market. It is about putting together a coherent story using fundamental narratives, plus moves and correlated markets. Let's look at an example of how deviation from fair value might lead me not to put on a trade  Let's say I'm an expert in trading, FCX and BHP 2 of the world's largest mining stocks. I'm flat and US markets are closed. But since I'm a highly motivated and curious guy at 9:00 p.m. I flick on Bloomberg TV, to check out the Chinese export and new loans data.  There's a high degree of uncertainty about the direction of the Chinese economy right now. So everyone's watching the release. The data comes out super weak much worse than expected.  Since China's a huge consumer of Commodities this week economic data should be bad news for FCX and BHP. The Market's been trading mining stocks from the long side for months on the back of a popular narrative that China stimulus and strong Chinese growth should boost earnings. The trade is crowded and the narrative looks stale my metrics show. There's a massive long position in Copper so expect it to get hit hard. I care about markets but I also care about health and sleep. So I go to bed at 10 p.m.  I spend the night dreaming about, how much FCX and BHP. I'll go short in the morning and hope that the stocks have not sold off too much in Asia, or London. Time this seems like a solid multi-day, trade idea, with good risk reward but I don't like trading on my phone when us markets are closed. When I wake up, I'm surprised to see FCX and BHP are unchanged. Awesome. My entry point will be amazing here that I flick to Copper expecting it to be down between 2% and 3%, but it's up 1.4%. Huh, that's weird.  The markets had 7 hours to digest, the bad China news. I thought the market was megalong and yet coppers up. 1.4%  At this point, my interest in shorting FCX and BHP would fizzle fast my thesis. Was at the market was long, the whole China narrative, but if that were true copper should be down on the bad news, not up by monitoring other correlated markets. I can get clues about my thesis and filter a bad trade ideas while homing in on good ones.  The better, you understand a suite of related Securities and the underlying fundamental drivers of those Securities, the more trade ideas, you will come up with and the more likely you are to weed out bad ideas before they cost you.  In that example I use deviation from fair, value copper rallying, and BHP and FCX unchanged means BHP and FCX looked low to avoid a bad short.  Let's look at a simple example. Where deviation from fair value helps me get into a trade  Embarrass the US dollar as it is recently rolled over after a multi-year rally. I believe, we are entering a new downtrend. I'm looking for opportunities, but haven't pulled the trigger yet.  The dollar had a huge interest rate Advantage for the past few years, but the FED recently. Cut rates all the way to zero while the rest of the world kept rates on hold the dollar is overvalued the Market's, Max long, the narratives turning. And I want to find a dollar pair to get short.  today is the last day of the month and I know for my research that in months, when stocks have gone up, significantly, real many hedgers tend to buy dollar Yen, as 4 pm London time approaches,  I also know that the most correlated Market to dalyan is US 10 year yields, which are still hovering around 1.2%, despite many interest rate cuts by the FED big moves in US yields almost always coincide with big moves in dollar yen.  Dollar and rallies from 10700 to 10760 as 4 p.m. London approaches. I checked to see if interest rates are moving higher which would justify the dollar Yen rally, but they are not, in fact, us rates are dribbling a bit. Lower the dollar Yen rally is probably just flow. It makes zero macro sense.  Meanwhile, significant resistance. Identified on my text sheet, this morning lurks, just above at 10780, there's 1 more push-up in dollar Yen right at 4 p.m. London and I sell at 1 0 7. 7 4,  3 us yields and US Stock Market. Both say dollar Yen. Should be gone, lower, not higher. That is cross Market supports the idea, I can explain why Dianne is rallying, not price, sensitive rebalancing flow. And when the rally is likely to end 4 p.m. London,  And 4 major resistance, very close means. I can put on a big trade with a tight stop, High leverage situation.  A trade like this is not unrealistic for most good trades. I'll have 3 to 5. 5 decent reasons and very few arguments the other way.  This trade is a good example of how cross market analysis. Gives me greater confidence to take the other side of a flow driven move. That is not supported by fundamentals or by action in other markets.  Pattern recognition and indicator scanning.  The final major source of trade ideas, after narrative news and dislocations from fair value is pattern recognition and indicator scanning. This can mean many things and Depends greatly on what products you trade. Good Traders, recognize patterns in their market and understand, which patterns are the result of Randomness and which are sending a persistent signal.  In the section of I discussed the fact that dollar Yen rallies into month end when stocks have done well, that month and we discussed other patterns of activity in various parts of the book.  when I say patterns here, I'm not talking about technical analysis, I'm talking about recurring price patterns, the more you read and study your Market, the more You'll learn about identify and back test. These types of patterns, here are a few examples.  Stocks trade poorly from September 16th, to October 9th, then rip higher into year end.  This seasonal is well known and persistent the worst week of the year for stocks, has been the week after options expire in September, that is the week. After the third Friday of September September 21 to September. 25 is the 5-day window, in which you had the least chance of making money long US stocks from 1990 to 2020.  There's a chart in the PDF and it's pretty dramatic.  I also show in the PDF the average path of equities over the course of the Year, again. Going back to 1990.  There are all sorts of seasonal patterns like this in many markets. You need to be very careful with seasonality because much of it is random experience and statistical Acumen can help you sort through what is random and what is persistent.  Analogs. When you have a few years of market experience, you will start to see trades and narratives evolving in ways that you recognize from the past history doesn't repeat but it rhymes.  When you can compare the current period to some period in the past that analog can help you predict what might happen next. For example, the euro dollar rally in 2017 and 2020 were both incredibly similar.  1. They both started with the relief rally, after a Euro positive, political event in 2017. It was the election of macron. In 2020, was the agreement on a European economic recovery plan.  2. The first wave of the rally went from 108 to 120 in both instances.  3, both times, the ECB, eventually pushed back as euro dollar neared, 120 and 4. There were very few pullbacks in the first wave of higher.  Here's a write-up. I did on this topic in June 2020.  Quote.  Going into round 1 of the French presidential election on April 23rd, 2017. Emmanuel, macron. Held a narrow lead. Over me mean  Markets viewed Le Pen as a danger to the euro because despite softening at the last minute, she spoke frequently of Euro exit arguing. It would allow France to gain from competitive devaluation.  Here are 2 representative lien quotes.  The euro is not a currency, it is a political weapon to force countries, to implement the policies, decided by the EU and keep them on a leash.  The end of the Euro would be an unbelievable opportunity. If we don't all leave the Euro behind it will explode either. There will be a popular Revolt because the people no longer want to be blown out or the Germans will say stop, we can't pay for the poor anymore.  So far so wrong anyway, when macarons, round 1 win all but assured him a second round Victory. You're a dollar gapped and trended higher. The current rally has a similar feel as a market has been waiting years for the EU to loosen the purse strings and take some baby steps. Steps toward fiscal Union, the macron Merkel agreement on May 1820. Got the ball rolling.  Comparing the 2017 rally with the current move. You get a chart that looks like this and please see the PDF for the chart.  The first takeaway is that this move in euro dollar matches the 2017 move pretty well.  The second takeaway, is that around this point in the 2017 rally, there was a 5-week consolidation.  The third takeaway is that most IPS were small on the way up, you didn't get more than a 1.5% retracement until the 4% correction in October 2017.  Next here's the rolling 40-day, draw down in euro dollar, starting once again, 60 days before the event date. And again the charts in the PDF  So if you believe in this euro dollar rally and think it should follow a similar path to the 2017, move scale in from 1% to 1.5% off the rolling. High note that 1 month V was in a 6 to 8% range after macron, 1 and 2017, and is currently around 7%. So using the analog makes sense, from a volatility perspective, we touched a high of 11384 on Friday so the 2017 Playbook would put the current buy Zone at 112 13 to 11270  End quote.  The analog was pretty good. It worked for months and correctly called the approximate path of the Euro for the next 10 big figures.  Now, analogs are never going to be perfect, but they are excellent tools. That will help you contextualize Market action and set reasonable targets. When you catch a move. If the Euro rally in 2017, was 108 to 125 and the rally looks similar in 2020 and also started around 108 you could do worse than to guess, the 2020 rally might Target 125 as well.  Analogs bolster your understanding of narratives and volatility.  another common pattern is that bubbles tend to Deflate by about 85% before rebounding looking at the major bubbles in recent history. Here's how much price sold off from high to low before making the ultimate bottom  Bitcoin 2018 84.2% XLF in 2008, 85% US homebuilder Stocks, 2008 85% NASDAQ bubble in 2002. 84% Japan's Nika bubble that peaked in 98 82% and the crash of 1929 in US Stocks 86%.  If you're looking to buy a deflated bubble asset, look for the 80% to 85%, discount area. It's remarkably common for burst bubbles to bottom around there.  Another pattern is that highs and lows are more likely on round numbers than on other numbers. I explained this in the section on round number bias. If you're looking for an optimal entry point and there's a major round number nearby, that's helpful.  Another pattern is that bankruptcy? Stocks usually rally on the open. When stocks reopen, after being halted for a bankruptcy announcement, that's often the ideal time for shorts to take profit. This is because once a stock trades sub 1 dollar. After beginning, bankruptcy proceedings, it can take months or even years before the stock is zeroed out.  It's not worth it for speculators to stay short all that time when there is. So little juice left in the trade  this is kind of a ridiculous trade, given your buying the shares of a bankruptcy, but it doesn't always have to make sense, often buying the shares of a bankrupt company, when the stock reopens, after the halt, for the bankruptcy, announcement can be highly profitable as a short-term 1 day to 1 week trade,  the patterns I've described are just the tip of the iceberg as you gain, expertise in your market and watch markets in general over the years  You'll discover more and more patterns. Remember that if you can explain a pattern and why it should continue to repeat, there is a much Higher likelihood. That pattern will be useful for trading.  Random patterns that you observe or discover by data mining are quite often simply the inevitable result of the fact that random data is chocked full of mostly meaningless patterns.  Find patterns and do your best to explain them, then make a rational determination of whether they might repeat in the future.  Indicator scanning.  Indicator scanning is a process where you have specific filters that will identify trading opportunities. This might be volume more large move filters in the equity Market, or a dashboard that shows abnormal moves in options markets,  Scanning for large moves and unusual activity can often lead you in the direction of a good idea.  The markets are mostly a sea of efficient tranquility and you're looking for whirlpools and weirdness. That might tell you something abnormal is happening.  Once you have a trade idea, hopefully, with the help of the forehead headings above surfing, the narrative news and events deviation, from fair value, and pattern recognition. You need to filter the idea using the other criteria in the grid. You'll need to figure out whether or not the trade can be structured in a way that offers compelling leverage and risk. Reward, can you profitably put this trade on at current levels? Or does it make sense to wait? Does the action in related markets support the idea or invalidate it our positioning and sentiment a headwind or Tailwind for your idea?  Sticking with the grid. Let's move on to the next row and talk about how we filter good ideas from bad.  2 filtering.  Your initial idea can now be filtered, using the steps listed in Row 2 of the big diagram. Let's go through how that works column by column.  A The Narrative cycle.  Depending on what your trade idea is, or where it came from, it may have occurred to you totally independent of the narrative cycle. Say, you've seen a pattern where bonds rally at month end and you think it might make sense to go along at noon on the last day of the month and take profit at 4 p.m.  It's only a 4-Hour trade. Surely The Narrative cycle, doesn't matter, right? Well, it depends.  You should still have an idea of what the story is in bonds, generally, and what might disrupt that story during the short time you plan to have this trade on.  Are there any fed speakers for example, if so in the narrative has been 1 of a dovish Fed while the most hawkish member of the committee said, to come on CNBC at 3 pm, that could be important.  Our stocks volatile these days.  In bare markets, stocks often squeeze higher into the end of the day. Is this a risk to your trade, the shorter, your trade, the less likely, the narrative cycle will matter, but it's rare that it doesn't matter at all.  Seen news comes out that Tesla plans to release a battery that lasts 3 times longer than its previous model you buy Tesla on Instinct and its immediately, 8 dollars in the money. Now you can filter a bit here.  where are we in the Tesla narrative, has there been chatter for weeks about Better possible, battery advance, and as everyone been building long positions, on the back of that is the market short Tesla. Because GM just came out with a battery that lasts 2 times as long as the original Tesla battery.  In these 2 narrative scenarios price action. After the initial. Knee-jerk pop is going to be completely different in scenario 1. You're probably stopping out as Tesla, crumbles back down through the news pivot while narrative scenario 2, the stock probably grinds higher all the way into the close.  No matter what logic you use for a trade, and what time Horizon, you're trading, think about where your Market is in the narrative cycle and what that means for the potential upside and downside on your time Horizon.  B positioning and sentiment.  Positioning and sentiment are usually closely related to the narrative.  Is the market long or short, or positions, strong or weak.  generally, if a market has climbed significantly, the Longs are confident and strong if a market was in a bull market, but has now tried Transition to a correction phase lungs are going to be more nervous.  If you know who's been buying or selling that can help too hedge funds are generally, going to be much weaker hands than real money or central banks.  Chapter 10 was a complete discussion of positioning and sentiment for this section. Just ask yourself whether your ideas made weaker or Stronger by the curve positioning.  For example, if there's a bare seasonal pattern, but everyone's talking about it and short because of it that seasonal pattern becomes, much less exciting.  If you spot an analog to a move, you remember from last year, then remember that. Positioning at the time was very similar to positioning right now. Your analog just got stronger.  I want to repeat something critical here. You don't always go against positioning. It's a factor but it's not the be all end. All  Traders who go against positioning all the time. Miss every major Trend because price loves to Trend and sentiment and positioning mostly follow price, be flexible smart rational. and open-minded, when it comes to positioning,  See events and catalysts what events and potential catalysts are coming up? Do they work for you or against you? How will they impact liquidity? If you're bullish, S&P futures for 7, good reasons. But it's 2:45 p.m. on the day before non-farm payrolls. It might not be worth putting on the trade or you may be able to use non-farm payrolls to get an even better entry point events and catalysts can create opportunity, but they can also impact liquidity and lead to discontinuous price action, random jumps. And so on  Sometimes you want to position into an event, because you have a strong view on that event, but often events should be avoided due to their random and eLiquid nature. Once again, think about whether upcoming events and catalysts are Pros or cons for your original trade idea,  D correlated markets.  earlier I explained how I use correlated markets, not just as a source of ideas, but as a critical filter For ideas that come from other sources.  Once you have your idea flip through the most important correlated markets and figure out whether those variables are supporting or contradicting your thesis,  Is there a coherent theme to those other assets that reinforces or pushes back against your idea?  Smart filtering with correlated markets, will help you dodge some bad trades.  E, technical analysis.  Charts are the worst place to come up with trade ideas, but 1 of the best places to filter ideas. You came up with elsewhere.  Good technical analysis and the patience to wait for good entries, can give you the leverage. That makes the difference between disappointing and amazing. Returns on a specific trade idea.  A good idea. Poorly executed is sometimes worse than a dumb idea with razor-sharp, execution, parameters.  As an example say, there's a bullish Aussie dollar headline, but I know that overall the narrative in the currency has recently turned bearish and the markets dying to add to its small short position. I react to the news and buy some Aussie dollar. But then, when I look at the chart, I see a were mid-range, with no support nearby B, there's a huge triple top close by just 20 Pips above the market. And see, my stop-loss will need to be 80 points away for the trade to make any sense. But even if the triple top breaks, there's a trend line, and the 2-year, High 25 Pips above that. So, this is starting to look like a trade where I'm risking 80 to make 45.  So the narrative overall is bearish, people are in sell rallies mode and it's a poor Tech setup to Market, more likely to use the bullish headline, to sell more Aussie dollar at better levels than it is, to rip the pair higher.  This is situation where the tech and narrative filters, just don't support the trade, I get out and I move on.  Don't fall in love with your trades. Treat them like they are dumb. A dozen every day presents. New ideas, New Opportunities and new trades. Don't overvalue your ideas. There will be no shortage of them. Going forward. Learn to love small losses.  Another example it's 10 a.m. and as you walk to get a coffee from the kitchen, a fantastic trade idea at crystallizes in your mind. You've been thinking about the spot rhodium market for a few weeks. But finally realize, it's time to get long sentiment is at an extreme Supply is drying up, and nobody has talked about rhodium in ages even though the other precious metals are all ripping higher. What are the odds that the spot rhodium Market is in the perfect place to buy at the exact moment. You came up with your trade idea. Probably pretty low.  So now step back and take a look at some charts, figure out the optimal entry point or an optimal entry band, is there an area where multiple significant reference points converge and you can go long with maximum leverage and a reasonably tight stop.  Note that tight stop. And rhodium is not really a thing, but let's not quibble over details in a theoretical scenario. Once you've completed this filtering process, your trade. Idea will either be stronger weaker or dead in the water to the filters. Support your analysis, or do they point to Crosswinds? This is a critical point in your trade idea, process, do you move forward or pause?  Or do you mix the trade? Because it's simply not supported by enough factors.  Bad trades, often start out as cool ideas, but then the trader ignores a series of obviously, contrary information and does not filter, because he's so excited about his cool trade idea. He can't accept the contrary evidence  That's how confirmation bias Works in this part of the process.  Trade ideas are hard to come up with. So the last thing you want to do, when you finally think of 1 is NYX it because of a bunch of filters but often that's exactly what you should do.  Well, good trades. Have very few Crosswinds that does not mean you only take the perfect trades. There's no such thing as a perfect trade.  You go through the filtering process with an open mind and then make a sound unbiased judgment when you're done. Final step in the process is a critical 1 consider alternate hypothesis.  We discussed this in depth in chapter 5, and I mentioned, Richard's Huer of the CIA and his 8 step process. I said it then and I'll say it again here, you should read that book. It's free on the CIA website and it's an excellent training manual for good, thinking, that will benefit. You not just in trading, but in any area of life that benefits from rational thought,  At this stage of the trade idea process, you need to think about the other side. If your trade idea is bearish corn, Futures. Think about what the Bulls are saying, find research notes that are bullish, go through their arguments, can you debunk them?  Sometimes I read counterarguments to my view, and I think, Ah, that's pretty unconvincing. So, I remain confident in my view. Sometimes I read the counterarguments and think, oh, crap, I totally missed that.  Remember that your brain is programmed to find supporting evidence that confirms your existing up? Hypothesis. You need to work hard to fight against that programming and honestly, pursue alternative stories. That might make sense.  A useful tool when attempting to embrace alternative hypothesis is to picture how the trade could go against you.  What would that look like, what specific factors or events might derail your idea and stop you out? This helps. You think about your idea from different angles and hopefully with greater objectivity and also gets you thinking about possible reassessment triggers if I'm wrong. What's it going to look like? This is something called a pre-mortem as discussed in Chapter 7.  Found your trade idea of people. You respect and see what comes back. Don't blindly defer to them or hope. They agree with, you doesn't really matter if they agree or disagree, what matters is any new information or evidence that they offer up, if a ton of people disagree with your idea? But you remain confident about it, that can be powerful because now, you know, you are not part of the Consensus. You have rigorously tested, your idea and it is resilient to scrutiny.  When someone smart gives me a good reason to doubt my idea. And I can't really refute their argument. I'm happy to toss my trade idea in the trash and wait, for a better 1 to come along.  Don't hold on to your ideas too tightly. This goes back to the idea of strong opinions, weakly held, which I discussed earlier. You need to come up with strong trade ideas, backed, by significant research, and multiple streams of analysis. But then have an open mind, admit error and change course of need be as new information comes in.  This is easy to say and hard to do.  strong opinions that are a 2 weekly held will be scared off by the first bit of noise, determining when to give up on a trade, is tough, we'll deal with that a bit later in this chapter,  3 tactics.  Okay, after filtering is done, it's game on your idea is good, and now it's time to determine tactics. Don't rush to your keyboard and start pressing the buy or sell buttons yet. First, it's time to fine-tune the tactics to maximize leverage and make the most money possible if you are right, being right. And making money are not always the same thing, you can be right and get stopped out because of a poorly, chosen stop-loss level, you can buy an option that expires worthless, the day before your beloved asset, rips to the Moon,  You can enter a trade mid-range make 11 Bibb, when the guy next to you threads. The needle at Major support makes 111 bips being, right? Is just the start.  Before you can put on your trade idea. You need to decide what to trade in many cases. This is obvious but not always. For example, I often have ideas driven by stock market views, but due to the nature of my role, I can't trade stocks. Therefore once I come up with a view on where stocks are going, I need to figure out what the best FX proxy is for stocks often. That means Aussie Yen or Diane, but sometimes it might mean Aussie dollar Color or even Euro Swiss.  I analyze 90-day correlation stats and think about what makes sense going forward. Then finally pick what product to trade,  If your Bears, the NASDAQ, you need to decide between QQQ sqqq qid, psq or NASDAQ futures or other ideas, you might even decide that a specific subgroup short, Fang via fngd, makes sense. Or you might take a view in a single name, like Amazon or Nvidia,  Which choice will give you the exposure, leverage, and directional movement you want with the lowest transaction costs.  Be thoughtful about the product, you choose to express your view, it matters.  Once you've chosen your product, it's time to pick your entry point.  Stop loss and take profit. The first thing I do here is pull up a chart. What's the dream entry point? What is a realistic entry point is the exact place where the market is trading. Right now, the best place to get in or am I better off waiting?  Obvious. This will often come down to the type of trade it is. If you're trading news, you don't have time to wait for the ideal entry point. You get in and then you determine your tactics after. But if this is a scenario where you're playing a turn in narrative and your trade is likely to last 3 to 5 days, you can finesse your entry point.  Using technical analysis. I will determine the ideal entry and stop loss at this point.  Rarely will I have a stop-loss closer than 1 day's range away unless the trade is ultra short-term, while a risk reward ratio of 1 to 2 or 1 to 3 is a decent rule of thumb for most trades.  There's no hard and fast rule. If you think there's a 70% chance, you can risk 1 to make 1 and you have high confidence in your 70%, probability estimate, do the trade, it has high expected value. On the other hand, given the significant uncertainty around probabilities and trading higher payout, ratios, give you a wider margin of safety.  Solid tactics. Give you Superior leverage because the more Or fine-tuned your entry point and the tighter your stop-loss, the larger position, you can take with the same amount of money at risk.  If you buy Apple at 100 with a stop loss at 99, you can take 5 times bigger position than if you buy Apple at 100 with a stop at 95.  Then again, your odds of getting stopped out at 99 are clearly higher than getting stopped out at 95. So choosing a stop-loss is always about the tension between as tight as possible and lowest chance of getting stopped out.  If you want to assist in that is simple. And generally effective start by risking 1 day's range to make 2. Or if your day trading risk 35% of an average day's range to make 70% of a day's range.  Those are finger in the air starting points and you can adjust as you gain experience.  When things are going well, and you have a strong feeling for your Market, you'll sometimes find trades where you can risk much less to make much more. Sometimes you can sell right against major resistance and risk just 20 % of a day's range knowing that if you catch the turn, it might be a major top and you can extract 2 full days, ranges from the trade, those trades are dreamy. Each trade will have its own ideal parameters based on technical analysis and the unique timing features of the trade.  tactics are just as important as strategy, you need both to succeed in trading  Once you have your entry stop loss and take profit determined automate everything. As much as possible, if Apple's at 100 and you've determined that 10150 is the perfect entry point for the limit order in the system, along with your stop-loss. If you don't put in a system right away, what do you think is going to happen in 2 hours when Apple spikes from 100 to 10150 your dumb? Lizard brain will say stuff like whoa it looks good. I better check if there's some news out or hmm. Maybe I can sell it 103 and get a better entry point or somebody must know something. Why is it rallying so hard?  Selling into a rally. Can be hard, just like buying dips as hard. Much easier is to calmly. Enter a limit order to sell at 10150 when nothing's going on and the stock is bouncing around near 100.  Automate and Outsource as much of the execution process as you can and you'll find you get better results, no matter how disciplined you are computers are more disciplined than you.  The last stage in the tactics phase is to write down or record, your list of reassessment triggers a Trader who clearly lays out. Her plan is way ahead of most Traders. She's cemented a concrete process and listed specific triggers for reassessment or exit.  Reassessment triggers are important because once you have a trade on, you'll be influenced by all sorts of new information that is mostly noise numbers jiggle on a screen, random headline, scroll by your heart rate ticks up.  Those are not reasons to adjust your risk. It's easier to list action triggers xanti than to hope you'll be saying. And unbiased once the trade starts to move Reassessment triggers will always include a stop loss and a take profit but can also be other things such as 1 time trigger. For example, any day trade can have a reassessment or firm exit time of 4 p.m. when the main New York Stock Exchange trading session ends.  Many good trades. Have a Time trigger. Another example, say, you've done a ton of work on today's US, retail sales number and you expect it will be weak.  You go long bonds at 7:45 a.m. in anticipation of the release at 8:30 a.m.  You believe that most of the new information from economic data gets fully priced within 10 minutes. Does it make any sense to keep the trade past 8:45 or maybe 9:00 a.m. at the latest? Probably not. So you put a reassessment trigger at 8:45 a.m.  2 level at which, to tighten the stop loss. Once a trade is made most of its gains. It makes sense to tighten up the stop loss.  3 new information trigger. Need to be as specific as possible here to avoid. Undue reaction to noise. If a Trader gets long oil on a Saudi Arabia, Russia squabble the trader. Should logically have a reassessment trigger as truce or consili Saudi Arabia and Russian headlines.  That is a logical reassessment trigger.  A bad reassessment trigger would be something like re-evaluate if price action does not cooperate, be specific.  And for cross Market variable trigger, if your long S&P futures and 1 of your main reasons for entering the trade, is that the vix just dropped below the key, 20 Level, it makes sense to use the vix as a potential cross Market reassessment trigger again, make it specific for example, if vix trades back above 21, I will cut my position.  Note that I'm using the term reassessment triggers, but often these are action triggers. The last example, is an action trigger. I use reassessment trigger and action trigger interchangeably. Since often a reassessment leads to an action, The first 2 re assessment triggers for any trade are always the stop-loss and take-profit after that, you record. Anything else that might change your mind, the goal for this stage of the process is to try to guess xante, what might be signal and what might be noise going forward.  When you have a trade on every price movement, feels like a signal or a sign of danger for your position. While in reality most price movement is noise.  every time price Jiggles lower or ratchets higher, you'll have an emotional reaction because you're invested the idea with reassessment triggers is to codify what will make you change your mind and what will not before the price starts flickering and jiggling around, and those dumb voices in your head, start to react to that flickering and jiggling,  Some other examples of good reassessment triggers.  A long stocks because I think the FED has turned more devish and the market hasn't caught on yet. There are 2 fed speakers this week. If either 1 of those speakers is more hawkish than I expect. I'll reassess my Or I'm sure bonds because I think the economy is strengthening any major US data point that comes in more than 1 standard deviation below consensus will trigger a reassessment.  Or.  1 of my main reasons for going long Aussie dollar was the rebounding copper and iron ore prices. If either copper or iron ore break below their 200 hour moving average, I'll reassess my Aussie dollar long position  If you take the time to record these reassessment triggers, you should find very few occasions where you make on the fly to decisions made trade. Once you have a trade on, leave it alone and let it bake. Don't rush it, don't keep opening the oven to Peak the market doesn't care about your time frame. A market that is not moving is boring but it's not telling you anything. Wait for your stop-loss your take profit or 1 of your reassessment triggers to hit stop white knuckling. Of course, there are going to be times when you're long and bad news comes out and you hit a bin and you save yourself some cash but these are not all that. Common just, as often, you'll hit the bid and find yourself, buying the stock back, 10 minutes later after realizing the news wasn't, as bad as you thought. And in fact, the news was actually meaningless. Remember that when you have a trade on you are biased. Information processing is distorted by your emotional state.  The best action is almost always no action. This is true when you have a position on and it's also true. Most of the time when you don't  Let me your actions as much as possible and you will put on only the best trades.  Then you'll stay in those trades long enough for them to bear fruit. This Is My Kryptonite and the greatest strengths and greatest weakness in my life. I can do a thousand push-ups in a day every Wednesday for 10th, straight weeks action but have an incredibly tough time. Going 2 hours with that touching the buyer or sell buttons in action.  This bias to action, gives me the energy to write a decent macro newsletter every day, and to pump out a book every year or 2, but it also makes it shockingly difficult for me to sit at work. And keep my hands off the trading controls.  My default mode is action. I've known that for 20 years and yet is still my greatest weakness in trading. I never stopped working on it, but I also accept it is who I am. I forgive myself more easily now than I did when I was 30. I try to automate as much as possible and convince myself to sit there and do nothing as much as possible.  Once, you know, your personal Kryptonite, fine-tune your process and redesign your framework to address it.  4 position sizing.  Position size is a function of 6 factors 1 convention level 2 free Capital 3 year to date, pno 4, Market volatility, 5, distance, from entry point to stop-loss and 6, Gap and liquidity risk.  Here's a quick summary of how to determine position size.  A toad on your conviction level.  B given your year to date, p&l and free capital. Decide on a percentage of your Capital to put at risk. This tells you how many dollars or basis points, you'll be risking on the trade C, using Market volatility and technical analysis. Choose the appropriate stop-loss D. Calculate the position size, which is dollars at risk, divided by risk per unit to get the total number of units.  E, think about liquidity, is this a reasonable position size? Can you get in and out with that much of an issue?  If not, can you scale in and out and maintain the economics of the trade?  And F think about Gap risks. What major events are coming up, how is the product been trading? Do you need to worry about limit up and limit down? Is there enough liquidity for this position size? In this step? You might reduce your position size because of a gap risk or consider exiting the trade before an upcoming event.  I'll go through this process again in the trade. Walkthrough at the end of this chapter, that should solidify your understanding.  Step 5. The trade process is execution. Good execution, reduces transaction costs and improves returns. This is important at all skill levels and in all trading businesses. Remember those charts that showed the impact of transaction costs in chapter 8,  transaction costs are important. It's lazy to ignore them or minimize their importance. Take them seriously.  Here are a few ways to reduce transaction costs and pay. Less bid, ask spread.  I discuss these approaches from the point of view of an equity Trader that these Concepts apply to trading in most markets,  1 use limit orders if Tesla's trading 281.10 bid and 281.3 offered and you want to buy, you have some choices. You can.  A send a market order and get filled around. 28130.  B, leave a limit order at Mid that is buy or sell at 28120 or C, leave a limit order to buy just ahead of The best bid or sell, just ahead of the best offer.  The decision depends mostly on the level of urgency, you feel option? A gets you filled every time and is the way to go. If there's news, if it's a fast Market, or if you're stopping out of a position,  Option, b is less likely to get filled, but still has a high probability of execution. The risk is that you bid 28120 and the market goes straight up in that case, you will not get filled. Then, again, if you bid or offer at Mid and you will get filled, the majority of the time in most markets, if you show a bit of patience,  Option C saves you the most on transaction cost, but can be riskiest since you need to wait for someone to cross a full spread. This can be a good strategy when nothing's going on but you need to weigh the risk of the trade. Going hard in your direction before you get filled.  I think people use way too many Market orders and not enough limit orders, but I've seen a change in FX markets over the past 5 years as more clients now use limits.  some people feel that when you leave a limit or, Order you give a free option to market makers or high frequency Traders, and it is true that limit orders, have some value and optionality for banks and hfts.  Still the money you save by strategically using limit orders, to minimize your transaction costs is worth it.  Crossing spreads with Market orders all the time is a huge leak for most Traders.  No order type or execution style is optimal at all times. It depends on the market and the situation in a product with a wideband offer spread, you're more likely to miss the trade if you don't agree but you'll also be saving more by using a passive strategy comes down to your view of what's going to happen in the very short term.  If you're worried about the trade ripping in a straight line before you can get it on with a limit order, use a market order. If you think nothing's going on or the market might even move against you a bit before the idea Works, use a limit order or algorithm to trade.  when in doubt consult an expert or Market maker in the product you trade to get a An idea of liquidity, it offer bounce and what might be the weak side in the short term.  Another way to save on transactional costs, if you are a large, institutional Trader is don't stick to 1 execution style. All the time, learn about the different order types, and algorithms you have at your disposal and mix in various methods, depending on your urgency and on market conditions talked to a few market makers you trust and ask them, how they transact there's a time and a place for Taps. But there's also a time and a place to pick up the phone and do a risk transfer.  Execution, strategy, always comes down to the trade-off between footprint and Market risk.  Fast aggressive execution has a larger footprint but less Market risk. If you go slow, you pay less at transaction costs. But you take the risk, the market will move against you in the meantime.  When it is time to execute, you need to decide how to balance the tension between minimizing footprint and Market risk at the same time.  Generally, for larger. Trades. I find a hybrid of human and electronic or algorithmic. Execution is best. You write a few algorithms in the background to take care of half your size and make sure the trade won't take all day and you run the other half with discretion using limit orders, while absorbing any meaningful chunks of liquidity, more aggressively  1 weakness with twap and vwap orders is that they generally ignore the amount of liquidity available in the market. Let's say euro dollar is 1 15 000 and a client wants to buy 500 million euros. They decide to run a 50-minute tap. That is by 10 million euros per minute for 50 minutes.  The computer starts buying drip, drip, drip, drip the computer buy zeros slowly, but surely at 1:15, 01, and 1502.  After 3 minutes a large Cellar appears.  Someone shows a large limit order and offered to sell 250 million euros at 1:52.  a rational human Trader would almost always By those 250 million euros because that's a huge chunk of the order to fail. Just 1 pip off the bid on the other hand, a t won't care, it'll just keep buying 10 euros per minute even though it could snag a huge clip of Euros. All at once, if it was smarter,  A hybrid algo, human strategy, gives you the best of both worlds.  A third way to think about transaction costs is to ask are there Securities or products to trade within your asset class that have lower transaction costs.  Many products trade as cash over the counter future ETFs and so on ETFs are great for some Traders. But Futures often have tighter bid offer spreads with the identical exposure.  For example, you might be better off trading S&P, futures, not the Spy ETF when you have the choice, Futures also offer more leverage than ETFs.  If you have a longer holding period, you might also discover that features are cheaper to hold than ETFs because Futures do not charge a management fee while ETFs do.  For example. SLV. The silver ETF charges 0.65% per year.  This is not an epic fee by any means, but if you can trade, silver Futures, you might find that more attractive depending on funding costs. I'm not telling you which products are best. I'm simply saying you should take the time to figure out the best way to trade your product, if there are various Expressions available.  Currencies trade over the counter but it's not always efficient for a hedge fund to set up credit with a bank. Sometimes it's cheaper for a fund to trade currency, Futures option. It's better for smaller participants to execute through an online FX broker. Sometimes they'd be better off in features. Point here is to think about the various ways of trading your asset or Market. If more than 1 Avenue exists,  And a fourth consideration with regard to transaction costs. When you trade a particular asset, ask yourself, whether there's another asset or security within your asset class that will give you the same exposure, with better liquidity for For example, a hedge fund PM who manages 1.4 billion expects China growth to pick up in the next few months.  He decides to go long, 500 million New Zealand Dollars ensured, the US dollar,  Given Aussie dollar is substantially more liquid than New Zealand dollar. Would he have been better off just buying Aussie? Very likely the answer in this scenario is yes.  Sticking with FX markets. Sometimes a basket will also give you the same exposure with better liquidity and lower transaction costs.  If a Speculator wants to take a huge bet on a falling dollar, she might be better off to execute 20% of her risk across a basket of 5 different currencies. Instead of going 100% short, say dollar Swiss  This situation applies to credit too where a basket of names can often give you bigger exposure with lower transaction costs than piling into 1 single name.  Retail Traders rarely have to worry about liquidity. And this is a huge Advantage for small Traders. They can trade anything. Whatever it's open and never have to worry about the liquidity. Yes, they need to worry about transaction costs but they don't have to worry about being able to buy or sell when they want or need to  I've heard retail Traders complain that If Only They had a bigger account, they could succeed in trading. That is almost always false. It's like, saying I can't win this race on a jet ski. If only I had an aircraft carrier.  A larger account is more difficult to trade especially now that almost every asset class has minis or fractional shares or unlimited divisibility like crypto.  The only Thomas small account is a handicap is. If you need to make X money and your account size is too small to do that. Generally smaller accounts can achieve more leverage, pay lower transaction costs. Have more assets to choose from and can achieve higher percentage returns.  in contrast, when funds grow larger than about 1 billion, the list of products they can trade slowly shrinks small caps and thinly traded credits or some short dated options, for example, become impossible to trade when you Here in behemoth.  Smart execution, improves performance.  Once you've executed your trade, automate, your stop loss and your take profit. If you can and record the trade in your Journal. These final steps should always be part of your execution process.  Here are a few more thoughts on stop losses.  1, if you trade huge size, it is more difficult to automate your stops. This is a difficult fact of life for very large Traders, but does not apply to most even a stop for 100 million Euros, which is a decent position size and FX is perfectly manageable.  If I'm trading a position, that's too large to automate. My stop loss. I simply automate whatever percentage I can.  If I'm short, 200 million, Aussie dollar, and I think anything about 50 million Aussies, too much to automate, I'll put a stop for 50 million in my system. At least that's a placeholder and serves as an alert. When my level triggers once, the 50 million has been purchased automatically, I'll get busy and cover the rest of the position ASAP. This is less than ideal since it relies on discipline and can lead to numb brain comments. Like, let me wait to see if it pulls back. Maybe I can get these on the bid or man Aussie, rallied so much already. I can't pay way up here.  When your stop loss level hits, you must act to get out of the position so you can survive to play again tomorrow. Don't screw around, trying to get the best possible execution. That's what you do on the way in not on the way out.  2, Sell stops should always be below around number and buy. Stop, should always be above around number. This is because of round number by bias. If you ever see a Trader leave, a buy stop in a stock at 999.99 or 100 dollars. Exactly. That Trader probably doesn't know what he's doing experts. Always leave their stops on the correct side of the round numbers.  3.  If your stop loss is in a really obvious place, where a ton of stops are likely to be, it's probably going to get done.  you need a bit of second level thinking when placing stop losses, if there's a triple bottom at 101, And everyone in the market is talking about it. Expect, there will be a pocket of stop losses at $100.80. Leave yourself below, $100. Instead the extra space will protect you from a whipsaw through 101 and could be the difference between a winning and a losing trade.  And finally, on stops when deciding between 2, stop loss levels, pick the wider. Stop surviving the trade is more important than maximizing leverage, though. Obviously, there's always an important tension between those 2 goals when you get stopped out at the lows before a huge rally. It really hurts.  Step 6 in the trading process is tracking. Once you put a trade on, take a few breaths and relax, don't sit there, staring at your screen, trying to decide whether to add cut or reverse your plans in place and you should not alter course. Unless 1 of your predetermined reassessment triggers hits or substantial. New information comes in  stick to the plan, when the Reward has changed substantially considered, tightening up your stop-loss.  And step 7 in the process is performance analysis.  High-performing trading professionals, constantly, iterate through a process of plan. Execute analyze improve plan, execute analyze improve.  It's a never-ending cycle of action and Analysis that should deal better and better results as errors are corrected and strengths are leveraged.  The information and feedback from your details trade records and Analysis will help improve your process.  Each month that you trade, your process gets a bit more solid and you use these improvements to plan better and trade, more successfully.  The time to analyze performance is when you are well, rested and calm.  After you exit a trade record, the information in your trading journal with as much detail as possible.  Your journal entry should emphasize the decision-making process once a month. Go through your journal, to look for patterns. Are you sticking to your player? Do you take profit halfway to your Target because you get nervous. Do you move your stop loss for no reason or ignore it sometimes?  Compare your training statistics to your history. Are you improving or getting worse? Focus specifically on the size of your winning days? Versus the size of your losing days? This is a key metric. If it's getting better or worse. Can you explain why?  The number 1 question, you need to ask is what is working and what is not.  Search for patterns and adjust your strategy and tactics to eliminate leaks and repeated errors. Are you biased to a particular direction that is? Are you always short? S&P futures and never long?  If you yes, either stop trading that product or open your mind to both sides. Directional. Bias is a huge weakness for short-term Traders.  once you complete your analysis and tweak your process, stop thinking about trades in the past and go back to thinking forward, what I mean by this is Ring fence your performance analysis. Do it all at once. Then, move on. Don't keep thinking about trades. You did in the past.  Now, that you understand my process and framework, in general, I want to walk you through the specifics of a real trade from start to finish in detail, when you're done listening to this example, I hope you have a clear idea of how a trade idea comes to life, the trade. I will describe is not some epic once in a lifetime trade. It's just a good trade of the sort, you should encounter fairly regularly.  Details trade, walkthrough short euro dollar. Trade September 2020. The setup  In June and July of 2020, euro dollar rallied in a steady uptrend from 108 to 1119.  There's a chart in the PDF of this move by the end of the summer, the market was all in on this bullish, euro dollar narrative.  a manual macro and Angela Merkel agreed to a Framework to bring Europe closer to fiscal Union, after approval, at an EU Summit in July. This removes Euro Zone breakup risk. And makes the Euro, am more attractive alternative to the dollar as a reserve currency.  ECB is quiet saying fiscal policy not monetary policy needs to do the heavy lifting on Co 19 relief.  No further. Easing from ECB is bullish euro dollar.  The FED has been Mega dubash in response to co 19 and is ready to get even more dovish, on the back of a new average inflation targeting framework.  The details of this framework are not yet clear and the market is excited to hear more from fed, chairman Jerome, Powell at Jackson Hole, late August and the next fed fomc meeting in mid September.  The market assumes these events will be dovish and dollar negative.  Euro dollar long positioning as measured by the daily sentiment index. And many other metrics is at multi-year extremes.  the stock market is rallied on global fiscal and monetary Stimulus and optimism around the economic bounceback. As the world economy reopens after Co 1 9  Stronger Global growth and World Trade tend to be bullish euro dollar.  Gold. Silver Lumber and other hard assets have ripped higher and sympathy as hard assets are viewed as reflationary anti-dollar trades and benefit from copious Global liquidity. And finally the US twin deficits have exploded and this worries. Some foreign investors  This was an amazing, bullish, narrative and many Traders. Most of the effects Market actually, cut some or most of it. By the time we reached 1, 19 in July, bullish, forecasters and Traders, were busy extrapolating as they moved their 120 targets to 125.  Bears forecasters. Meanwhile, ratcheted their forecasts up for 105 to 115.  A big series of forecast revisions can often be a sign that we have come too far too fast.  Strategists cannot leave stale forecasts hanging out there for too long.  For example. If your forecast was 105 and your dollar was 108, then you're a dollar rallies to 119 your 105 forecast looks a bit ridiculous. Now, you don't want to have a ridiculous forecast, so you stay bearish but you move your forecast up to 115. That's how forecasting Works generally. Forecasts go up and down with the market price.  A big series of forecasts revisions can often be a sign that we've come too far too fast. Strategists cannot leave stale forecasts hanging out there for too long at this stage, a great deal of good news. Was priced in. Then the narrative slowly started to shift 1 Fed chair, Powell delivered, an uneventful launch of the fed's new average inflation targeting regime at Jackson Hole.  Markets were hoping for a strong signal that the Fed was ready to act at its September meeting, but there was no such signal.  2. The ECB started to push back on Euro strength, with Chief Economist, Philip Lane and president Christine Lagarde, both commenting. Separately that a higher gyro made the inflation Target. More difficult to reach.  When a central bank comments on its currency, pay attention, sometimes it's irrelevant. But other times it can be Trend changing 3 gold. Which had been leading was making a series of lower highs.  And 4 stocks Were Meant to enter their worst month of the year September and were trading with a very high positive correlation to euro dollar at that time.  Furthermore, I had several other reasons to feel bearish stocks bullish. Retail hysteria was strong as David day trader and the robin hoodies gambled in stocks and of sports as retail box. Calls. Vix went up as stocks. Rallied, that's unusual. When stocks are going up, volatility should be going down. If they go up in tandem that can be a serious danger sign.  As we approach the first fomc meeting after the fed's announcement of average inflation targeting speculators clung to the old bullish euro dollar narrative. Even though it seemed fairly clear that narrative had expired or at least made. Much less sense.  This was especially true as we had a 10% plus rally in euro dollar that already touched most people's original Target of 120.  It's funny how once a trade gets to a Target. Many analysts and Traders, just raise their target, instead of cashing out on the idea.  The day of the fomc meeting. I sent a survey to AMF X readers and responses showed a, there was a very low expectation of any major dollar negative announcement. But B, most speculators in the survey were small or medium short dollars.  And there's a chart in the PDF.  It was an interesting dichotomy, people didn't expect much but mostly stay short dollars. Anyways, this is typical. The market will usually hold on to a position or narrative until price forces them out. Regardless of how stale The Narrative has become.  Since euro dollar was still near the highs, then people stuck with their dollar shorts into the FED meeting. Furthermore this is a classic bad trade with good Optics because The asymmetry favors short dollars on the outside chance of a big policy shift and a huge move lower in the dollar.  Holding short dollars into the fomc was a lottery ticket trade and speculators love lotto tickets as discussed in the section on favorite Longshot bias.  Based on this information I believed it was an excellent time to take the other side and go short euro dollar at the prevailing level. 11865 the morning of the fomc meeting  Note for the record. I'm not writing all this with the benefit of hindsight. This trade all happened in real time and I wrote about it before you a dollar moved.  Here's an excerpt from my pre-fed write up which I published in AMX. The morning of fomc to give you a sense of how I was thinking about the trade.  If you want to fade the crowd and join me long dollars, a good expression would be short. You're a dollar here with the stop at 119 51. Here's the rationale.  you're a dollar is the best vanilla expression of straight dollar views these days and euro dollar loan, Are still out there. 1 1917 was the high after lagard at the ECB meeting and 1, 1929 was a level when Philip Lane spoke talking down the Euro. So you have a clear stop-loss level just above there.  It looks like the market does not expect much from the FED but is going in short dollars. Just in case to me that means there's a good chance of a dollar higher move as the meeting, disappoints and weaker dollar shorts and lotto tickets unwind end quote.  The result.  The FED meeting delivered, nothing special and Euro dollars. Sold off aggressively down to 11788 in New York time, then hit 11737-1.  Still participants mesmerized by the bullish Euro narrative stayed in buy, the dip mode. So the key 117 level held again. And we got 1 last push to 11850 the charts in the PDF and you can see the fomc meeting, right in the middle.  at that point, the trade was extremely frustrating, because It looked to me like the narrative had clearly turned bearish, you're a dollar but price just would not cooperate. I hung on to the view but my confidence was dented by the rebound off 11737.  then the weekend after the fomc, meeting Supreme Court, Justice Ruth, Bader Ginsburg died,  This is a great example of a catalyst that triggers a move, even when the Catalyst really makes no sense.  Sometimes moves that were meant to happen. Just need a random bit of news to kick up volatility that the market will go. Where you thought it should have gone days ago.  If anything the vibe on the weekend RBG passed away, was that the news could be bad for the US dollar because increase the chances of a constitutional crisis around election time. The first clients to trade on the open sold dollars,  But then in the chart you can see that a few hours after Justice Ginsburg. Died, euro dollar entered a steep aggressive decline. As mentioned earlier 1 17 o was considered the bottom of the range in a major support for euro dollar. So I covered too early at 11710.  That I risked 86 Pips to make 155 Pips.  Astute. Observers will note that there was more money to be made in the primary trend from 108 to 120 than there was playing the pullback and that's true. In fact, the rally from 108 was a textbook macro news trade, as a good news for Euro came out right as the market was Max bearish Euro and still very bearish stocks. When I went short euro dollar, I considered the possibility, it might trade symmetrically and go all the way back down to 108.  But I believed it was a counter Trend move and the dollar would stay on a downward Trend in the bigger picture. That's why I played the trade as a short-term pullback. Not a new downtrend. It took profit at 1. 7 1 0  In an ideal world, it would have been a major turn and I could have tried to ride the thing all the way back down to 108. But in this case, that is not what I believed.  I often trade counter Trend and narrative is turning style trades. But the juiciest trades occur. When you identify a new trend where positioning is Max short you get in early and you ride it all the way up until the market is maxed long. The euro dollar move from 108 to 120, fits that description and was rather tradable in real time because the pair hung around 109 for a full week. After the macron, Merkel news broke, then it finally ripped higher.  This is not meant to be a recap of 1 of the greatest trades of all time. It's a detailed story of a good trade that made sense and made money.  But is not some rare bird that could only be spotted once every 70 p in forman's.  This is a typical short-term Global macro trade, you'll see all the time.  Now that you have the overview of the trade, let's go through each of the 7 steps in the life cycle of a trade.  To provide more granular detail.  1 idea, generation. The idea comes to me gradually, as I see the market build, a bigger and bigger long position in euro dollar even as it seems clear that the Bull story has been Kampachi and much less compelling.  Crosswinds blow all over the place and you're a dollar Bulls are still heading out to sea with full confidence.  The ECB pushed back and the disappointment from the FED on the AIT story which had generated significant Market excitement and media attention. Make me think we're past Peak narrative and price is sure to follow. This is a classic stale narrative trade.  2 filtering.  The Narrative cycle positioning in sentiment all work in favor of the short euro dollar trade idea.  Correlated markets do not have much to say though. There is a huge triangle forming in gold and the weakest seasonality of the year is coming up in stocks so that helps events and catalysts work strongly in the trades. Favor as the upcoming fomc, looks like to hurt anyone hanging on to the bearish dollar trade  in fact, there's a strange dichotomy where speculators expect nothing from fomc but hold large short dollar positions anyway  Technical. Analysis, suggests 2 key news, pivot highs 1 1910 and 1 1929 both on ECB comments.  That represents a meaningful double top.  We look at the alternative hypothesis. The main alternative hypothesis is that the FED might deliver something very dovish at the fomc meeting.  This is a real possibility, but I read it about a 10% chance. I'm comfortable with the risk, otherwise I'm fully aware of and steeped in the bull narrative. I've been studying it, and participating in it for 4 months, being expert in the current narrative. I feel like I can shoot down the Bulls arguments 1 by 1 with high confidence.  That sounds a bit arrogant, but honestly, I'm never as confident as the last paragraph sounds still. I am as confident in this case, as 1 can reasonably be in a game where the rules and probabilities are constantly changing.  It's more about being confident enough, not perfectly confident.  If risk reward is 1 to 1, you need Supreme confidence. But at 1.8 to 1, there's some margin of error to work with.  3 tactix. The whole story is about euro dollar. So product Choice, here is easy, euro dollar. Obviously, with regard to the stop-loss, I consider the 11910 1 1929 area important. So I placed my stop at 11951 above those 2 levels plus another 25% of a daily range and 1 pip above the round number when 1950.  My take profit is 11711, there's a huge support at 17 from July and August so I simply placed my take Profit just ahead of that.  Risking 86 Pips to make 154 which is a 1 to 1.8 ratio is fine by me. As you know, I don't stick to an arbitrary ratio instead. I think about expected probability of success versus upside.  In this case, I think I'm better than 50/50 to be correct. So risking 86 to make 1 154 is excellent. Leverage my reassessment. Is easy in this case and it is an automatic exit trigger. If the Fed meeting is Ambiguously dovish, my idea is wrong and I'll get out as quickly as possible. I also add top side brake of gold triangle as a reassessment trigger but not an automatic exit.  If gold starts ripping higher, that's probably not good news for my short euro dollar trade.  For position sizing, I have to be a bit opaque here because when you work at a bank you're not allowed to discuss specific trade details. So here I introduce a young Trader with 4 years of experience Phoebe.  She has a yearly stop loss of 3 million she's plus 2 million PO on the year and use this short euro dollar idea as a type 2 trade.  She has free capital of 5 million which is her Max loss of 3. And her year to date p&l of 2. She decides to risk 4% of free capital on the trade, that's 4% of 5 million, which is $200,000.  Then she calculates her position. Size, which is dollars at risk, which is $200,000.  Divided by the difference between her stop and her entry point, which is 11865 to 11951. And if you do the math, that equals 23.2 million euro dollar,  That's kind of a normal size for a bank Trader. She rounds it off and thus plans to go short 23 million euro dollar at 11865  The market can easily handle both an entry and a stop loss for 23 million Euros. So, liquidity is not a constraint here. Her stop loss is far enough away that she believes with high certainty that she'll be able to access 23 million euros of liquidity at or before 1111951 even on the worst possible fomc outcome.  She thinks about the catastrophic outcome, say fat announces a, massive new QE program and runs through her memory of similar incidents in the past. She's confident, she will not blow herself up on this trade, Even If the Fed fires a bazooka. There's no risk of ruin.  5 execution, because the FED meets in a few hours and she wants to trade on before the meeting, there's no chance to fine-tune the execution. She places a 11865 limit order to sell and gets a fill within a minute or 2, the moment, she is filled. She inputs a stop-loss order to buy 23 million euros at 1:19 51.  She flips open her journal and enters the details of the trade along with a quick note saying she is nervous because she doesn't usually take positions through major events.  She feels proud that she's keeping the full size, 23 million euros. Whereas, in the past, she would have cut back to 10 million euros through an event like this, just in case.  Her confidence in her own judgment of event and GAP. Risk has grown  Once the trade is on Phoebe, literally sits on her hands to keep herself from Trading. The fomc meeting starts, the statement is released, and you're a dollar flies around during Powell's speech, currency, pair goes up first for no, Reason then crumples under the weight of the disappointing outcome, nothing new from the FED equals disappointed dollar bears.  Phoebe watches with minimal emotion. Knowing this is just 1 of many, many trade. She'll do this year, she updates, her stop loss by adding a take-profit Oco to buy at 11710. She leaves the office and bicycles home.  That night Phoebe is awoken by her loud neighbor at 2:14 a.m. she breaks her own sleep, through the night. Don't check your phone rule by checking her phone. She sees euro dollar is trading around 117.  She does a quick fist, pump and falls, back to sleep. She dreams of waking up with euro dollar at 16060. She dreams of giant cartoon dollar signs, she dreams of more fist pumping.  But w w w w. Sad trombone. When she wakes up she sees euro dollar has rallied back to 1801  by the time she leaves work. The next day. It's all the way back at 1 180. #Disappointing.  Her conviction is not broken, just bent. She knows, nothing's changed and her thesis remains valid and intact. The Fed was a dubash. Gold is not broken the triangle, her stop-loss hasn't hit and her take-profit is nowhere close. So she sticks to the plan.  That's the whole point of reassessment triggers, if none of them have triggered hands off the keyboard.  Eventually a few days later despite what looks like dollar negative news Ruth Bader, Ginsburg dies triggering a possible, constitutional crisis in the US election. Euro dollar dumps slower and her take-profit hits.  She made 356,000 profit on the trade.  Euro dollar keeps going straight down, but she's smart and rational and doesn't much care. What happens in a market after she gets out of a trade, once you exit a trade, don't sit there saying what it could have should have if it keeps going nobody cares and neither should you start thinking about new trade ideas? Think forward, not back. The ability to flush past trades quickly from your mind is a useful skill that will help keep you sane and productive like the tattoo says no regerts.  There are lessons to be extracted from most trades but you should extract them quickly and move on, write, any Impressions and lessons you take away immediately in your notes column and start thinking about. What's next here? Phoebe writes took a good sized position through a major event stuck with the plan, despite some scary whipsaw moves. Good process. Good outcome.  Record your trade results at the appropriate level of details so that you can go back and analyze your trading once per month by conducting post-mortems. Just once a month and not each trade individually, you'll view your trading more holistically and will be less likely to get bogged down in the emotional Joy or pain of specific trades.  That completes this walkthrough of the short euro dollar trade of September 2020. I hope it helps you understand my thought process and provides enough great. Angular detail. So that the giant grid numbered 1 to 7 in the PDF makes complete sense at this point.  I would suggest you print that thing out and put it on your desk.  This concludes chapter 12 and our discussion of the specific steps that go into finding executing and monetizing trade ideas, the methodology and Mathematics you use to develop and optimize your trading process are critical to your success as a professional Trader.  Now, let's head to part 4, and dig into the 2. Most critical aspects of Trader mindset, adaptation, and attitude.  Part 4 adaptation and attitude. You can memorize every method and synthesize every strategy in this book. But if your mindset is bad, your trading will be bad as an experienced Trader and the author of 2 books on trading. I'm intimately. With what needs to be done to trade successfully, still? I go through periods of terrible, performance and sometimes struggle under the weight of bad attitude, or mindset experience helps. But even wildly veterans, like me are not immune to periods of poor adaptation. Sluggish, mental energy, sloppy, trading, and frustration.  A rigid mindset, negative mental loops and low energy will derail the best laid plans, and render. Even the most carefully planned process strategy and tactics of worthless.  With the right attitude, there can be no sustained success in trading.  The next chapter will discuss the importance of adaptation and then we'll close with chapter 15 and some final thoughts on the importance of a healthy attitude.  Chapter 14, adopt or die.  Stay flexible and Achieve long-term trading success.  Quote adopt. Or perish. Now, as ever is Nature's inexorable imperative end quote.  HG Wells.  Trading success can be fleeting or sustained. In this chapter, we discuss the mindset and approach that will allow you to thrive and survive as a Trader over the course of years and then decades.  Latching on to 1 style or overcoming to a specific methodology is not the answer. The answer is adaptation and flexibility.  Excellent Traders adapt to changes in market conditions and micro structure over time, Alpha Traders recognized, for example, that Trend following was delivering, lower and lower returns in the 1990s and of complaining and sticking with the failing strategy, they developed new strategies, and found new ways to trade in the 2000s.  When they saw algorithms enter the market in the mid-2000s, they did not scream. These Algos are stupid. This is dumb. Instead they thought, okay, this is a major To change your Market structure. How am I going to adapt? How can I beat the Algos? How do I make money in this new regime?  No Market regime lasts forever, profitable strategies slowly disappear because efficient markets discover them and crowd into them.  If everyone is making money trading correlation, you can bet it will attract more participants with more participants profit shrink and strategies die.  You saw this with the high frequency firms. In the 2010s, initially, high frequency Traders, were oboli profitable across the board, but as the decade wore on the arms race heated up faster and smarter strategies, and by the end of the 2010s, most high frequency strategies, barely generated enough returns to cover costs  A small group of Highly adaptable. Firms crowded out all the less Nimble. Participants,  Study and adapt to ongoing changes. In Market structure, markets are in a constant state of evolution and good Traders need to be aware of this the big structure. Changes happen. Every 5 to 7 years and these are of Epic importance.  However, probably more important are the continual changes in the market that require adaptation in real time.  A poker player, cannot expect to win in the long run by employing the same style and strategy over and over. She must adapt as a game changers and respond in real time as the metagame evolves.  Here are the most important markers of Market structure, and how to continually adapt to them.  Order versus chaos.  markets alternate between Order and Chaos chaotic markets, often called Fast markets, generate temporary inefficiencies and outsized opportunities but also tend to be short-lived dangerous and volatile  Order and equilibrium are the Market's, default state, but when chaos arrives so does disequilibrium.  Dislocations, present the opportunity for Traders to capture abnormal returns. Fast markets are high risk. And high reward. Here's a primer on trading fast markets.  Trading fast markets in World War. I there was a famous quote, quote, Modern Warfare is matzo boredom punctuated by moments of extreme Terror end quote.  I would paraphrase here and say modern trading is hours of boredom punctuated by minutes of extreme Terror things are quiet, most of the time but what matters is how you act and react when the guano hits, the rotating blades.  Crisis markets can provide the best opportunities for profit and the greatest chance of Ruin. Markets, can lay dormant for months, then go completely insane. A whole day, can go by without excitement, then a headline hits, at 4 p.m., and everything boots off.  In this section, I discussed fast markets and more specifically trading during a crisis or extreme High volatility event.  Trading crisis markets and trading idiosyncratic, bursts of extreme High volatility involve. Most of the same skills and Concepts.  It's usually easy to identify when a crisis is happening but for Simplicity, I would say anytime. The vix is above 40, that's a crisis Market. Looking at all the days, since 1990 the vix closed above 40, just 2.2% of the time. And I threw a chart in the PDF  the vertical bars in the chart Mark, every time it closed above 40 and most of them are famous events in financial Market, history 1998, the ltcm Meltdown, and Asian financial crisis, 2001 September 11th, the.com Bubble. Burst 2008, Global financial crisis  20102011 Euro Zone crisis, 2015, energy crisis. In China dval and 2020 Co 1 9.  There's nothing special about the number 40. It's just a level we rarely see in the vix.  When markets are in crisis, you need to trade differently. You need to be faster and smarter The challenge is to be both more careful and more courageous at the same time that's hard to balance.  fast, markets are scary, but they are the best times to make money and to truly excel at trading, you need to crush fast markets, here are some tips to help you trade fast markets,  1 correct position. Size is the difference between winning and losing in a crisis too. Big is not okay, you might blow up or get fired too, small is not okay. Either you need to seize. The moment trading in fast markets is when the most money gets made and the alpha Traders emerge.  I remember, as volatility went to the moon in 2008, I changed my normal trade size in dollar Mexico from 20 million to 3 million and I was still amazed and scared by the volatility in my pnl.  If you can size dynamically using forward-looking estimates of volatility that's ideal. Look at what options markets are pricing for 1 week volatility, if you can't do that, look at the average daily rate. Over the past 5 10 or 20 days.  As a rough logic, check for day Traders, your stop loss should rarely or never be closer than within 1/3 of a day's range.  For swing Traders, use 1 full, day's range. In other words, if you're trading Apple common stock and the average daily range over the past 5 10, and 20 days is 25 bucks. Day trader stops should be 8 or more away from entry and swing Trader. Stop should be, at least twenty 5 dollars from entry. This should be a good starting point in most markets.  If you get stopped out and chopped up every day, your stops are too tight. A smaller position with a wider. Stop is necessary in crisis markets, but you need to be mindful that you don't get so small, you're trading, meaningless positions, that won't move the needle on your pnl.  Yes, a lot of Traders get blown up in a crisis but a lot just tied under the desk and reveal they are fundamentally risk-averse. Actors who are not really fit to trade moving markets  Striking the balance between 2, big and 2, small is vital. In trading and that balance can be the difference between crushing a crisis period or getting crushed by it.  2. Keep an open mind and use your imagination. When Co 19 hit in 2020, the market took oil from 65 to 50 as concerns about consumer demand, not to Market that was already built up on cheap energy stocks.  Then the OPEC meeting in early March crumbled and crude plummeted from 50 to 27 in a week.  The pressure from Co 19 start the ball rolling. When the Saudi pledged to public crazy broke the back of the oil Market.  Anyone watching oil, go from 65 to 50. Might have thought that was enough of a move. It's a big move. I'm going the other way, not a good plan. Eventually oil went to minus 400 this leads to the next point about crisis markets.  3 in crisis markets there's no such thing as overbought and oversold don't be the person that Fades the whole Bare Market all the way down in a crisis. Stocks can stay oversold. For ages, then get wildly overbought days. Later, you need to differentiate between run-of-the-mill. Risk, aversion and crisis. Level risk aversion  Most risky asset sell-offs are routine Affairs that should be traded using sentiment and overbought and oversold signals.  When you see put call ratios are the green and fear index or DSI or whatever, positioning indicators, flashing a reversal signal. It's normally time to pounce but in a real economic or financial crisis these signals are useless. For example there's a simple metric I use to calculate overbought and oversold which I called the deviation as discussed in chapter 10.  It measures the difference between the current price of an asset and the 100h. Our moving average, as a deviation gets to Prior extremes, it can give a nice mean reversion signal.  In the PDF, I show an example, using euro dollar.  In that chart, you can see the deviation the grey line in the bottom panel oscillated, consistently between minus 80 and plus 80 Pips. Over the course of 5 months and the overbought and oversold readings offered up some decent reversal trades.  Then the co 19 crisis hit and all hell broke loose.  the next chart in the PDF adds February 2020 and you can see that as the crisis, hit the old measures of oversold, were blown away and euro dollar ripped higher  4 have courage.  Insane markets are the reason you got into this business. Don't hide under your desk and hope for the tornado to pass. Get involved and trade like, you know, you can don't put yourself in a position where you look back years later with regret. It's better to try and fail than to Forever wonder, what kind of Trader you could have been  By the time, the 2008 2009, Global financial crisis was over careers were made and lost.  Some of those losses were not people that blew up but just traders that sat there doing nothing while their peers, extracted insane, pnl out of thin air.  Most of my best trading memories are from crisis periods. Because these periods Deliver fast, volatile and exciting markets, like any high stress profession, Pro Sports, jet fighter pilot, professional poker. It all comes down to how you respond in the periods of extreme stress. Don't be shy, get involved.  recognize when your product transitions from normal trading to a fast market and adjust your position size and trading strategies accordingly,  Volatility.  Fast markets are temporary, but changes in volatility, can be more permanent. Do you know how to size your risk correctly to reflect current levels of volatility?  Does your methodology respond systematically to changes in volatility? It should, for example, higher volatility, means you should be trading smaller positions, lower volatility means larger positions.  Bad Traders. Always put on the same position size.  Many Traders are not very good at adjusting their position size and risk management strategies in response to volatility. If S&P features are moving 1% a day. Do you have the same position size or stop-loss parameters? As if they're moving 3% a day clearly the answer is no.  Actively adjust your trading as volatility changes.  The easiest way to volatility adjust or vole adjust as most professionals say, is to use a spreadsheet that determines position size and stop-loss parameters based on a volatility input. This does not have to be complicated.  The figure you use for volatility adjustment will never be perfect because we don't know future volatility until it happens that said there are many ways to estimate future volatility and those estimates will generally be accurate enough for our purposes, for example, in the PDF, I show a chart showing the Vicks on any given day plotted against the percentage range in the S&P, futures the day after you can see from the plot that tomorrow's range has a strong relationship with today's vix.  The relationship between Vicks and S&P. Ranges is not linear or normal, as you can see because there are many outliers. The point is not to be perfect. Here, here's a simple, but realistic example of how a Trader could apply this information and use good thinking to determine position size.  Frank trades only sap Futures and has 1 million dollars in his account. He buys or sells in the open each day and risks 2% of his account 20,000 on each trade. He does not believe much in technical analysis. So he simply sets his stop and take profit this way.  Stop-loss equals entry-level. Plus half of 1. Average. Daily range take profit. Equals 2 * stop-loss.  In other words, he risks half a day's range to make 1 day's range. These parameters are not unreasonable and a simple methodology like this will work in real life.  The point of the example is to show that changes in volatility should change your sizing and risk management parameters.  Frank looks at yesterday's close in vix and plugs it into a formula in Excel. And in the PDF, I show a Table of Frank's risk in 6, different volatility regimes.  And you can see in the table, that as volatility Rises, Frank takes smaller positions. If he normally trades, 50 e, mini contracts at Market, volatility Falls substantially, he'll find the volatility of his p&l Falls. If he doesn't adjust the number of contracts, he trades,  In contrast, if he sticks the same number of contracts in the same p&l parameters as volatility Rises, he'll get stopped out of good trades all the time before they have a chance to work.  All of the things being equal the probability that your trade hits its stop loss. Level is a direct function of volatility.  I cannot emphasize this enough, you'll position size should change as volatility changes. This is the easiest and most automatic adaptation you can make as markets change.  Range versus trending. While markets can be volatile or quiet and liquid or illiquid. They can also be viewed through the lens of range bound versus trending. Range band markets favor mean reversion, strategies pH low, sell High while trending markets favor breakout or go with strategies buy high, sell higher  You should always have a good sense of whether each market. You trade is trending range bound or neither, it's not always easy to tell.  Start by looking at the chart and making a subjective Common Sense. Assessment sometimes arranged, bound or trending Market, is easy to identify at a glance. The harder part is identifying when the market is transitioning from 1 to the other,  The simplest way to identify the range or Trend status of a market and a possible change is with technical analysis tools. I prefer simple technical analysis to more, esoteric methods. So, here are a few simple approaches to gauge whether a market is ranked found or trending.  Note that this methodology is suited to short-term trading with a 1-hour to 5-day time Horizon.  1 has a price made a new 20-day high or low in the last 10 days if you? Yes, it's If no range bound.  2, put a 100 hour and a 200 hour. Moving average on an hourly chart. If the price of the asset is above both the 100 hour and the 200 hour, that's an uptrend. If the price of the asset is below, both the 100 hour and the 200 hour, that's a downtrend. Everything else is a range.  You can substitute different moving averages depending on what you find, generally fits the trend of the product and time frame. You trade.  If you're trading a longer time Horizon, you can also put 3 moving averages on your daily chart. Say, 2050 and 100 when they're in order. It's a trend. 20 greater than 50 greater than 100 is an uptrend for example.  When they're not in order, there's no Trend or the trend is weak.  And number 3, just eyeball it. This sounds kind of stupid, but generally no advanced mathematics degree is required to determine if a market is trending or range, bound often a cursory glance at a chart. Or you're experiencing there are trading the market for the past month or 2. Reveals the type of regime.  it's not difficult to figure out if you're in a range or a trend regime, but the challenge is to trade appropriately and to figure out when the regime is changing,  Assume Trends and ranges are somewhat persistent, and wait for evidence of a regime shift before. Altering your approach,  It's better to wait for a signal to tell you. The regime has changed that to try to anticipate or front run that regime change.  Volatility liquidity and Trend are the 3 features. You should always be able to describe with confidence for each market. You trade.  You should always know where volatility is relative to recent history. Whether liquidity is good bad or ugly and whether your Market is in a trend or a range. If you update your view of these 3 variables daily, you will adapt in real time. Better than most of your competitors.  Here are some other ways to adapt to bigger macro changes in Market structure.  Realize no Training Method works on. Always and forever. No matter how well your methodology works right now. There's a chance it won't work. Tomorrow be vigilant to changes in the market and monitor the success of different trading strategies. For example, if you notice that breakout trading has not been working for you, over the past 2 years, spend some time thinking about, why has your methodology changed? Did you stop following your own rules or are there new algorithms doing the same thing? You used to do? But faster are the basic breakout trading strategies such common knowledge that they no longer provide any Edge. If everybody's doing the same thing, the odds are low that it will make money.  William Faulkner's advice to fiction writers was Kill Your Darlings. What he means is no matter how much you love some paragraph or character or senior you've written, if it doesn't work in the bigger picture, cut it.  The same applies to trading strategies, don't be the traitor. That is a 1 tricks and the pnl shows. That it doesn't work. Do not fall in love with strategies that made you money in the past, Kill Your Darlings.  I tell you this from experience because throughout my career, my bread and butter was always trading lead, lag and correlation between currencies and variables like oil, gold interest rates and equities.  This made me a pile of money from 2003 to 2013 or so. But since then, it has been much more difficult to extract profit from this approach.  Too many people know about the methodology, too many blogs post about it and too many algo Trade. It  In 2006, very few FX Traders, had live feeds for gold oil and single name. Equities. Now, every single Trader does. In 2006, there might have been a few expensive. PhD, built algorithms traded correlation. Now, you can build a correlation trading algo in Excel, in 2 hours and plug it directly into the market through an online broker.  Efficient markets, eventually. Prevail always. It took me a few years to transition, but now I use correlation more selectively and question the logic more aggressively before I employ it as a tactical or strategic decision-making tool. My first assumption now is to assume lead leg will not work and then see if I can find reasons why it might work in this particular instance.  In the past, my base assumption was the opposite. I'd assumed it would work. Then, try to think of reasons, it might not  When there's a major change to the structure of markets, stop and think.  How is this going to impact me?  Here are a few examples of major structural changes that have changed markets in my lifetime.  1996 currency market trading moves from voice Brokers to electronic, Brokers 2001 US Stock Market stopped trading in fractions and trade in decimals in  2002 to 2005, algorithmic trading becomes an important part of most markets 2010 to 2015. Flash crash has become an Important liquidity risk in many markets.  2019 to 2021.  Free stock trading for retail Traders triggers several euphoric running of the bulls in US stocks.  I believe that adaptation is 1 of the keys to survival and professional longevity in almost every industry.  A good athlete adapts as our sport changes, just like a good Trader adapts as markets change.  Be thoughtful about the current environment, how it is changing and how it might change in the future. Thank you about how you can adapt your trading to stay ahead as Billy means says, to the Aging baseball Scout in Moneyball adapt or die.  This all circles back to the discussion near the start of the book where I discussed conscientiousness and the growth mindset.  Good Traders adapt because they are thoughtful about adaptation and employ it as a conscious strategy in their trading, but they're also more likely to have a growth mindset in life, too. Keep adding new knowledge on the existing. And never say things like I'm not good at that or I don't trade that kind of Market. The market won't always be in your favorite regime identify and trade the reality, not the ideal.  Since the market is a huge adaptive system, you need to constantly adapt to it as the Red Queen and through the looking glass by Lewis Carroll, says quote. Now, here you see, it takes all the running, you can do to keep in the same place. If you want to get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast as that end quote.  You need to work twice as hard as everyone else. If you want to get ahead, understand the market, regime, and fit your trading strategy to that regime.  Don't embrace the trading style and hope the market complies with it. Trading style should describe your time Horizon risk management approach and preferred analysis methodology. It should not describe the specific strategies you prefer.  Specific strategies work and specific market regimes, and you need to adapt your overall style to the regime. Like most important trading behaviors adaptation is easy to understand but hard to continually execute successfully. It's specially difficult to give up particular strategies that work for many years.  Think about the areas where you've been slow to adapt and how you can catch up, think about how your Market has changed or is changing and change with it.  That's it for our discussion of adaptation. You are now about 91% done. This audio book in the Final Chapter, I'll give you some parting thoughts on healthy mindset and positive thinking, your attitude and mindset will determine some part of your success and help you bounce back. When the market pummels you into submission now. And then  Chapter 15. Thank God. It's Monday.  It is impossible to succeed without the right attitude.  In this chapter, I offer some final thoughts on how proactive. Goal setting, self-awareness and attitude shape. Our trading experience and impact trading success. Before we dive in, let's start with the Chinese fable.  There was once a farmer in ancient China who owned a horse, you are so lucky. His neighbors, told him to have a horse to pull the cart for you.  Maybe the farmer replied 1 day, the farmer forgot to latch the gate and his horse bolted. Oh no this is terrible news. His neighbors cried such terrible misfortune maybe the farmer replied.  A few days later. The horse returned bringing with it 6 Wild Horses, how fantastic you are so lucky. His name was told him now you are rich.  Maybe the farmer replied.  The next week, the farmer's son was breaking in 1 of the wild horses when he fell off and broke his leg. Oh no, the neighbors. Cried such bad luck. Maybe the farmer replied.  The next day soldiers, came and took away all the young men to fight in the war. The farmer's son was left behind due to his injury. You are so lucky. His neighbors, cried, maybe the farmer replied.  I like this story because it's a great reminder that we never know how the movie is going to end. Your life is a big long story and everything that happens. Along the way is driven by 6, heaping spoonfuls of variance, don't get too triggered by any specific short-term outcome.  This chapter explains what it takes to find and maintain a healthy mindset. Over many years of trading, it's pretty easy to come in to work all rubbed up. When you're 23 years old and in year, 2 of your trading career. But how do you find a state of mind that will let you trade for 10, 20 or even 30 years? What kind of mindset do you need to keep trading? Well, into your 40s?  In this chapter, I'm going to. Once again, ask you to complete a few quick exercises, it's easy to be lazy and skim over exercises and books like this. But please don't when you passively absorb information from a book, it is so so different from when you engage with questions, stop to think, right? Things down and actively and honestly assess your strengths and weaknesses.  Self-evaluation.  Introspection can feel a bit cheesy at times and it makes some people uncomfortable. I know, I used to gag when this sort of stuff came up in Business School.  Please suspend your cynicism. This first exercise will take less than 10 minutes.  professionals who self-evaluate set specific goals and create clear action plans, outperform those who do not  The first exercise is to complete a super quick self-evaluation to give you a bit of inspiration and momentum. I've completed the self-evaluation myself just now.  And I plan to follow through on the results.  In the PDF, you'll find blank boxes for you to complete.  Quick self-evaluation completed by Brett Donnelly on August, 17th 2020.  2 strengths, in trading, 1, understand and love macro, always have a ton of passion and trade ideas 2, Unlimited risk appetite. 2 weaknesses in trading 1 over trade too many positions Andor positions too. Big 2. I'm disciplined. When mental energy is low  2 strengths in life, 1 rational optimism sets of humor 2 writing and communication.  2 weaknesses in life, 1 spread myself too thin. There's not enough time in the day for everything I want to do. Sometimes I choose friends or markets over family.  2 addicted, to change and stimulation, need to sit still and enjoy the present moment more.  A goal, I could accomplish in the next 6 months that will build on 1 of my strengths finish this book.  A goal, I can accomplish in the next 6 months that will improve 1 of my weaknesses.  Find a performance coach or psychologist to work on cognitive therapy or behavioral modification to improve discipline and break. Bad mental habits.  Now, it's your turn. And like I said, there's an empty version of the questionnaire in the PDF. People in the business World, spend a lot of time working on their weaknesses. Personally, I think working on strengths often has more value, not to say, you ignore your weaknesses, just make sure you keep leveling up your strengths too.  It's a bit like when you coach kids in a sport, if you spend all your time focused on the weakest players because they tend to demand more attention, you neglect, the athletes with all the upside that's clearly not good for the best players, but it's also just generally bad for the team overall.  As I mentioned in chapter 5, I'm a big fan of setting just 1 or 2 goals no more.  Look at the 2 goals. You wrote in the self-evaluation and put reminders in your calendar, for 3 months and 6 months from now, did you complete both goals in the 6-month allotted?  If you didn't fill in the assessment in the PDF, go back and do it. Now if you choose not to read this angry footnote instead,  Angry footnote.  Are you serious? About becoming a better Trader if you want to be good at something. You have to put in the work you've invested hours into listening to this book. Take 10 or 15 minutes to look Inward and of angry footnote.  Now, let's cover a few more facets of quality trading mindset.  Passion. What is your purpose when it comes to trading? Organizations have mission statements that help them stay on a path towards success. What's your mission statement? Why do you trade write a simple statement of purpose? Here's mine.  Coming to work, energized and positive. Wait for opportunity then trade as a aggressively as possible within clear rule-based risk limits. Write something interesting every day. Make clients happy, avoid random low EV trades.  A simple statement of purpose can serve as a compass when you're feeling lost printed out and stick it to your desk. Whether you are, crushing it sucking wind or something in between Circle, back to the statement and ask yourself. Am I on track?  Now, stop listening. And think about your statement of purpose.  Don't come back till you're done.  All right, welcome back. Notice that there is nothing in my mission statement about making money. It's more about process and attitude, if I wrote a mission statement when I was 25, money would have been front and center. I'm not going to poo poo money as a motivation, it is a great motivator, a bit later, I discuss how money was my number 1 motivator, when I entered the business of trading. But now it's just way down on my list.  Trading pays. Well, if you're good at it, it's an outcome that derives from a process, focus on the process and let the money. Take care of itself.  The longer you trade, the more you'll find yourself focused on becoming the best possible Trader, and the less you'll focus on how much money you're going to make.  The time to worry about compensation is, when you're negotiating an employment contract, negotiate the most lucrative contract, you can then be glad you're employed in 1 of the most fun jobs in the world and get to work.  I worked at a day trading shop called Swift trade and The late 1990s, they had a huge banner across 1 wall that read. Thank God. It's Monday.  If you don't feel this excited about trading most of the time, that's a bad sign.  The role of emotions in trading. We discussed emotions in chapter 6 and here I give you a few more thoughts, emotions can Cloud judgment and hurt your trading behavior when extreme, but overall, I don't think there's anything wrong with emotions in trading. When you watch Elite athletes perform, you see, plenty of emotion and yet their performance is at the highest level  don't suppress your emotions observe and understand them.  Let me repeat that. Don't suppress your emotions observe and understand them emotions are not bad. You do not need to be a robot. In fact you need to be something that robots are not self-aware.  When you're too high, you get sloppy and overconfident. When you're too low, you lose confidence. Therefore you need to be aware of these emotions and include them in your decision-making. For example, you might say, I just high-fived the trader next to me because we both jumped on the same headline and are hugely in the money. That is clearly assigned. IMU Fork. I'm going to cut half my position. Actually I'm going to take profit on the whole thing.  or I have a look at my throat because I'm so angry about the terrible fill that bank just gave me  and now I get a voicemail saying, my sprinkler system repair is going to cost 3,400. Ah, my entry point on this trade sucks, I can barely think straight  Pauses and moves outside of his body, to observe himself and his raging thoughts.  Shoot, I really can't think straight right now.  I still like this position by giving, my emotional state, a better off, cutting it in half moving, my stop further away to give it some room to breathe and to give myself a chance to breathe.  This is how good self-awareness and metacognition work. When you can think about how you are thinking, you move to the next level of trading, awesomeness, because you'll start to see errors happen in real time and you'll gain the ability to course, correct. before a faulty decision hurts, you  Also note that the traitor in the second quote is using time delay. A proven strategy to avoid the potentially negative effect of emotions on decision-making.  Time delay is the simplest and most effective way to ensure an emotion will not impact a decision. Full-blown emotions naturally. Dissipate over time and physiological responses fade. The best way to stop strong emotions from leading to poor decisions is to Simply avoid making decisions when you are in a strong motional state.  if you're feeling super high or super low square up and go for a walk,  take a moment to think back over the last week. What emotions have you felt while trading? How strong were these emotions list? Physiological. And behavioral markers that you can readily identify  For example, my face gets flushed and hot when I'm near or through my daily stop-loss limit. I feel like singing and joking around more when I'm up huge on the day.  I, Kind of sick when I'm in the process of breaking 1 of my own rules, especially with regard to position size or p&l tolerance.  Think about your physiology and behavior throughout every day and take note of irregularities.  Commitment engagement and hard work.  Nobody succeeds in, trading by doing it half-assed, you need to do the work. If you're too tired to do the work, get some sleep again. If you can't bring yourself to complete the few 5 or 10 minute exercises in this book, you're probably not ready to commit to maximum trading. Success, get motivated in trading hard work means you must work to become an expert in the products or markets you trade. You cannot become an expert overnight. That's why I strongly advise new traders to pick a short list of products to trade, 1 particular currency pair. A single commodity or maybe 3 to 5 different single-name stocks in the same industry and goes deep as possible on those products.  Healthy body leads to healthy mindset. I know, you know this but I'm going to say it anyway. You can never reach Peak mental performance without proper exercise. Sluggish. Body equals sluggish mind. Find a way to eliminate the decision-making process when it comes to working out and make it a regular habit. That's just not a choice or an option.  The easiest way to do this, is to work out every single day, even if it's just for 20 or 30 minutes soon, you'll find that if you don't work out, you feel bad. And you want to get back in the gym rely as little as possible on Willpower and as much as possible on The Power of Habit.  Superstitions in a book. About rational trading the section on Superstition should be just 3 words like superstitions are. Dumb there done.  The crazy thing is even a person who takes a placebo, knowing it is a placebo, still derives, some benefit from it. The human mind is strange and complex. If you're afraid of the number 13, why mess with it? They might put you off your game, personally, I avoid trans. Is acting in amounts of 13, Even though, I know technically, it's not rational because I believe there's a non-zero possibility in my subconscious views, it as bad luck, and this subconscious belief could infect my trading or confidence.  Niels bore the famous. Atomic scientists had a horseshoe hung above his office door. Many of you, this is surprising or confusing. As they viewed bore as a scientist and a man of logic. When asked do you a Nobel prize-winning scientists believe in such superstitions as the magic of a horseshoe?  His response was of course not but I understand it's lucky whether you believe in it or not.  This is a similar to the concept of Pascal's. Wager, Pascal said that no matter how tiny the odds that God actually exists, it is still worth believing in God. Given the huge upside eternal life in heaven versus the downside, a few Earthly sacrifices.  anyway, I just included this bit about Superstition in case you were wondering why a book about rational thinking has no chapter 13.  Forgive yourself.  Don't be too hard on yourself. Look at your failures as objectively as possible analyze them, but don't waste your time, smashing your head against the keyboard.  First of all, the sun will always come up tomorrow. No matter how badly you traded today after a big failure, you should.  Step away. Calm down analyze.  Extract any lessons often. There are none.  Move on. Get ready for tomorrow.  Every trade is a spoonful of water and a huge ocean flush your mind quickly after a failure and come in each day with thoughts like this. In your mind, today is a new day. All I can do is work hard and do my best  Even the gods of trading experience, huge failures. Here's a passage from Stand drunken Miller's, famous speech at the Lost tree Club. In 2015, in this excerpt he recalls the devastating moment in 2000 when he paid the ding-dong highs for size at the peak of the.com. Bubble quote, so around March. I could feel it coming. I had to play. I couldn't help myself 3 times during the same week. I pick up, but don't do it, don't do it. Anyway, I pick up the phone, finally, I think I missed the top by an hour. I bought 6 billion dollars worth of tech stocks and in 6 weeks, I had left Soros and I had lost 3 billion in that 1 play.  You asked me what? I learned. I didn't learn anything. I already knew that I wasn't supposed to do that. I was just an emotional basket case and couldn't help myself. So maybe I learned not to do it again, but I already knew that.  End quote.  You are just like stand drunken Miller, you are human, you will make mistakes, that's okay, hitting a baseball and the major leagues is similar to trading and that there's a high expected failure rate baked into the process.  A Hall of Fame, hitter will get on base, maybe 35% of the time, the other 65% of the time, he fails Billy, being the Oakland Athletics General. Manager immortalized in the book and movie Moneyball was asked why Lenny dextra succeeded in baseball while he did not. Lenny was an inferior athlete to Billy and was drafted, much lower Billy replied. Quote Lenny was so perfectly designed emotionally to play the game of baseball. He was able to instantly forget any failure and draw strength from every success. He had no concept of failure and he had no idea where he was and I was the opposite end quote.  Lenny. Understood whether subconsciously or not? That failure is part of the game. You strike out. You move on, you hit a home run. You move on each at bat is a new test just like in trading. Each day is a new test.  This anonymous quote, nicely sums up, the inevitability of mistakes and trading quote. Good judgment comes from experience and experience, comes from bad, judgment end quote.  Find your mantra.  A mantra is something we. Feet over and over out loud or in. Our heads mantras can be positive or negative, for example, an insecure person's Mantra might be, I'm too fat. I'm too ugly. While a positive mantra might be something more like I can succeed if I just try hard every day.  Develop your own Mantra and say it over and over. Use it to drown out negative thoughts. My Mantra is stick to the plan PS. I still don't always stick to the plan.  Think about your trading history.  Quote, the strongest and most solid legs are formed by personal experiences that we have a lot of emotion attached to because they were painful or pleasurable experiences and quote Tony Robbins.  If you've been trading for more than a few years, think about how your trading history and experience to date influence, your current approach. If you started in a highly volatile year, are you more comfortable, trading breakouts? And volatile markets if your best year was 2008. Are you always hoping for For a bare Market. If you started in a less volatile period, do you favor mean reversion and so on?  Research shows that Salient memories are often an important driver of future Behavior. Think about your Salient trading memories and how they might influence you now.  I sometimes find myself thinking I made so much money with this strategy in the past, it's really hard to give it up.  Instead of dumping a losing strategy that I know doesn't work anymore. I stick with it. Like you stick with that old friend who's now bad influence and always borrows money from you but never pays it back.  You can go pretty deep into the psychology and dig into traumatic or Salient moments from your past and Link them to current behaviors. I'm not qualified to talk about that. Plus, I find it's often a bit of a stretch when I read about connecting, for example, that Salient memory of being bullied in the playground or whatever, to your current trading leagues. Do whatever works for you.  a true professional works hard and does their best each day even if they don't feel like it Trading requires endurance and a commitment to work hard every day when I get sloppy or lazy I pay the price. There's someone else out there willing to do the work every single day and they want the same money you want.  The global Alpha Pi is a certain size and the competition for slices and crumbs is epic.  When I'm finding things hard, I narrow my focus to the current day. I think about what doing a good job today means and I try not to think about the medium or long term.  The long term is just a whole bunch of single days added together and what you do in each of those individual days determines where you end up in the long run. Um, often surprised by how some random thing I did 5 years ago or random person, I made an effort to connect with 3 years ago. Comes back to help me.  The Game of Life is incredibly long, make each turn count,  think about your personal history.  Think about your history childhood and young adult years especially and how it might influence your trading for example. if your dad was an electrician and your mom was an entrepreneur,  Your subconscious might have trouble with the idea that in trading he magically pull money out of thin air without any traditional hard work and without producing or creating anything.  Many Traders from Blue Collar families, struggle with this, when they first find success, it is a strange and sometimes surreal feeling to generate huge income without producing anything clearly trading is not the only job where this is the case, but the sometimes gigantic and sudden income stream from Trading, make it different from most other Pursuits.  I grew up in a lower middle-class family in the second house down in a row of 5 attached houses. You can see a picture in the PDF.  We had enough money to live normally and not worry about cash. But when there was a school trip to Europe or whatever, no chance there was no extra money, just the minimum required amount. Meanwhile, my godparents successfully created and sold an advertising agency and retired when they were 40 years old. They had 1 child and to keep her company, she was around my age. They used to take me on their 2 week trips to the Caribbean. Every March I got to see a whole different world of opportunity and awesomeness, I want that. I thought  A fridge with a button you can press to get water full-size. Basketball hoop with fiberglass backboard right on your driveway. I want that.  That goal getting out of suburban Ottawa and into something exciting. And new had a huge influence on my perception of money as a giver of freedom and Novelty and kept the fire in my belly through late high school and University.  My high school years were the days of Gordon Gekko and Wall Street the movie. And after I read Liar's poker cover to cover at age 15. I knew what I wanted to do my 1 and only goal was to become a Trader on Wall Street. I had a crystal clear and Laser focused motivation money that singular Focus was good,  however, as I matured and built a decent life for myself and my family, my name became Less important. There's a minimum level everyone must reach before they can stop worrying about money. Above that amount the correlation between money and happiness. Usually flat lines, the naive and single-minded pursuit of a high-paying job. When I was young, made my life, pretty simple. I had 1, clear goal and all I had to do was work towards it. The weird thing about dreams though, is that once you achieve them, there's a hole where the dream once was  So for many, including me, achieving a dream can produce a fleeting sense of elation followed by a deeper existential disorientation. As the thing that was pushing you forward, all those years, no longer has any power. A feeling of now what?  By the time, I hit my 30s and realized that, any increase in money would not give me new freedoms or happiness. I hit a bit of an existential wall. It was not as clear or obvious. What my motivation was. I still sometimes have tricky thoughts about what I'm doing here. Still trading at age 47. When there are so many Other interesting things to do out there in the world.  My early life focus on money meant I needed to find new reasons to trade as I got older.  After looking Inward and thinking about things for a few years, I developed a new set of motivations.  1. I love trading. I enjoy going to work every day. Going into an office where I enjoy. What I do. I like the people I work with and I respect the management. I report to have been the most important drivers of my happiness. Over these years, the constantly evolving macro picture and the Ever Changing Market regime and nearly impossibly complicated process of trying to solve the market is enjoyable. If you enjoy coming into work each day, the money doesn't matter as much.  No job is fun all the time, but if trading isn't Fun, most of the time, you're not doing it right.  2, I want to push my writing 1 of my favorite things to do is write about finance and markets working at a bank and writing AMF. Every day is the ideal platform to do that again. Intellectual stimulation before money.  3, I want to maintain my current level of monetary success, but do not really aspire to anything more than what I have. Now financially, the idea of getting wildly Rich does not excite me. Working as a Trader at a bank is a high-paying job that involves skills that most people don't have. I should just be thankful and keep trading until the day they tap me on the shoulder or the day. I don't love it anymore. Till then I'm grateful for the job I have and I don't need to dream of making 5x when I'm making now because I know that will not make me happier, everyone has a money versus happiness. Curve, think about the shape of yours, there is a point for everyone except sociopaths where more money will not deliver more happiness. The shape of your Curve will depend on where you live, how many kids you have? How you grew up your values, your ambition, and your opportunity set. Don't be 1 of those people that just always wants more that will put you on a treadmill running towards an impossible to reach goal.  Be thought. About what kind of money you need to do what you want to do and aim there. Don't keep moving the goalposts or you'll never be happy. Life is not a video game.  Think about your own upbringing, how you value money, or don't and how that will influence your motivation. More money is not always the answer. In fact, it usually is not the answer. Unless you're struggling to pay rent or cannot afford to pursue specific, costly passions like travel or owning a boat.  Many people believe that success leads to money and money leads to happiness. I think the chain of causality is mostly wrong in real life. If you're happy that is you enjoy coming into work, each day are passionate about what you do and have a positive attitude, you will succeed. And in trading and inevitable output. Of that process will be a whole bunch of money.  The number 1 reason to trade is that you love Trading?  Final mindset advice, speed round, don't get too high or too low. Don't be an asshole, don't burp, Bridges. Don't sing on the desk when you Making money arrived on time, do the work. Enjoy yourself. Treat The Gatekeepers in the back office and support staff with respect. Don't bitch about algo, turn off your phone at night. Take cold showers, take responsibility for everything that happens to you. Learn about the size of the universe lift, weights, watch less TV or no TV have outside interests. Don't Look Back in Anger, fast cheap or good. Pick 2. Don't talk about trades. You missed. Nobody cares. Always go to the funeral if you have heartburn. Don't take a pill to fix it. Figure out what foods are causing it and stop eating them. Drink more water, especially if you're prone to headaches, be open and transparent in business relationships, give more than you take. If it comes down to luck, you're doing it wrong.  Smile at yourself in the mirror. Be nice. Call your mom.  Conclusion.  I hope you found this book educational and also not boring. I hope that. I improved your overall knowledge of markets and gave you some interesting and random insights about trading mathematics and life and I hope you Can extract some useful information from this book and use that information to make more money and to achieve whatever goals you've set for yourself.  If you take nothing else from this book, remember these 6 points, 1, the first rule of trading is don't blow up 2 to succeed in trading. You must be rational and you need to put in the work 3. It's okay to be wrong.  4 variance is part of trading deal with it.  5, there's no single trading methodology that will work always and forever and 6 trading should be fun. Most of the time  Now before you go please complete 1 final assignment.  Flip back to the questionnaire, in the PDF, from chapter 1 pick, a few categories, where you want to make a change and draw a small arrows from the current box to the box where you would like to be be realistic. If you're generally risk, averse and have trouble committing to full-size positions, don't Target a 10 and risk. Appetite try moving from 5 to 7 for First you don't need to change on every metric. This is about incremental Improvement pick traits, where you think a change will make you a better Trader, if you're comfortable with your discipline score at 8 and think there's not much value trying to change it, leave it. You want to find 2 or 3 trades at most and think about how to move the needle on those.  What is the date today?  Go get your phone and put a reminder in for this date, 1 year from now, it should read, renew questionnaire and Donnie's Alpha Trader book.  Come back to this book. What's for you on this date for? As long as you're trading and do the survey again, keep improving every month and every year you can change it just takes time, play a long game. Keep pushing yourself. Do not give up no matter how hard things get.  I almost gave up a few times.  In December 2007. I was beaten down and frustrated. It was my worst trading year ever and it looked like I might finish negative on the year.  When you work? Market making seat at a bank. It's fairly uncommon to have a down year and I was proud of never having finished in the red.  After this long and frustrating period, all I wanted to do was finish the year in the black even by 1 dollar.  Every time I got close to zero pno, I'd lose money again.  By mid November, I had gone from down 2.5 million back to 250,000 in the black. I was thinking about making 1 last push to finish with the number. That might be at least respectable.  I finally felt mildly optimistic for the first time in ages after almost an entire year battling repeated cycles of frustration and despair.  Then a brutal turn.  A Salesman slicked over to me with his tail between his legs told me there was an out trade in my book negative -700,000 that put me back to minus 450,000 with less than 2 months to go in the year gross.  I grinded at the next few weeks and was finally up tiny year to date about dollars. On the very last day of the year.  At 10:00 a.m. our toughest client called and wished me a happy New Year by ripping my face off to the tune of 600,000.  Despite what felt like a heroic effort to the very last day, I ended the year in the red.  This is impossible. I'm the worst traitor in the world.  I emailed my wife. This is impossible. I don't think I can do this anymore.  I walked out of the office miserable that day.  But the sun came up on January 1st slowly, the frustration dissipated a bit and the prospect of a new year. Gave me some hope.  Despite that exhausting and disappointing year, I hung on and kept going.  12 months later. I was staring at my best year, ever over over 50 million dollars of pno.  Sometimes the thing is just to keep going. As Joe Morrow said in his classic 2016 email to the Goldman Sachs analyst class keep running.  Thanks for taking the time to listen to this book. I really appreciate it, please. Feel free to reach out to me with feedback criticism or questions. You can follow me on Twitter at Donnell, Brent and on LinkedIn.  1 last story before you go.  Before I sign off, I want to take you on 1 last trip down memory lane back to the year, 2000 around the time of Napster and the biscuit in the hanging, chad, the moment. Someone argue American optimism peaked at a time before the dotcom crash before 911. And before the global financial crisis and way before Co 19 a time when the world was less cynical, and there was no social media and bull markets, were much. Loved and quantitative easing was a weird experimental form of monetary policy that only PhD economists in Japan new or cared about  please note that this story is written from the point of view of my wildly overconfident 27, year old self.  July 26th 2000. It's 305 p.m. I'm sitting at my workstation in a 50 person day. Trading operation in Toronto Canada. I don't have much risk on waiting for the 4 pm close.  A few months ago in March 2000 the NASDAQ topped out just about 5,000, then crashed to 3200. Everyone thought the tech bubble had gone permanently Tango. Uniform people thought finally game over.  But not so fast now it's summer. We're trading back above 4,000, the feds cutting rates and new all-time Highs are within reach.  About a year ago, I deposited my entire network 25,000 into a day trading account. Now I'm running 350,000 plus it's worth noting this factors in a fair. Number of purchases, including a nice library of PS2 games. 2 years of rent in downtown Toronto, a sweet ass Sony, 200 disc CD player and a black 1996 BMW M3.  Many days, I bail out of here by 2 p.m. because there just isn't much trading to do. After lunch. But today, I'm here for the clothes. It could be a big 1 JDS uniface. A Canadian Optical networking stock and internet darling jdsu.  Will be added to the S&P 500 today. When a stock is added to an index. It creates a ton of demand for the stock because many funds simply track the indexes, so they need to buy the stock that's added in order to accurately mirror the index. The jdsu inclusion was announced a few weeks ago and there's been some excitement about it today is the day.  The indexers are not particularly smart about how they add the stock, they just buy it at the end of the day. This leads to a situation where large S&P ads, create nearly impossible to fill demand for a stock in the closing moments of trading on the day of the stock is added.  stocks closed at exactly 4 p.m.  among 800 shares of jdsu. A decent, but not super aggressive position size risking 4 dollars. A share. So 3,200 maximum loss. Or just under 1% of my Capital, it's 356 pm.  To give you a sense of the hysteria around jdsu and Canadian Tech. Darlings at the time from October 1999 to March, 2000, jdsu. Rallied 600% splitting 2 for 1 3 times in 6 months.  Meanwhile, Nortel networks. Another Canadian technology favorite represented 35% of the entire Toronto. Stock Exchange market capitalization in July 2000.  That's right. A single Canadian company. Accounted for 35% of the entire Canadian stock market dwarfing. The big 6 Banks, and the hugely profitable Western Canadian oil companies, insane.  It's 3:57 p.m. jdsu is trading around 1:32 and everyone in the day trading office around 50 Traders. Owns some I'm nervous because when everyone owns something in markets it's usually wrong. The idea is to know something before everyone else does then get out once everyone. Knows it, but I don't want to miss the last push higher as every Index Fund in the world comes in to Hoover jdsu.  It's 3:58 p.m.  the stock rallies to 13650. I tap a few buttons and I'm out, no way. Am I holding on until exactly 4 pm? It's way too dangerous. Sometimes with these index ads, too many people are positioned in advance and the buying from indexers is a big enough to offset all the day Traders, trying to take profit and the price crashes. Right? At 4:00, I'm satisfied with the profits of 37,750 minus brokerage brokerage is Tiny. So that's pretty much 3750 in my pocket Traders here. Keep 100% of p&l after brokerage fees.  I settle into my seat to watch the last 2 minutes of fireworks. I feel like I should have a bucket of popcorn in my lap for this. It's 3:58 and 42 seconds. Tension builds in the room. There's always a ton of activity at the clothes even when there's no index at. So with the GDs, you thing happening, everyone. Is still here and everyone is locked and loaded for any last second opportunities.  The greediest jdsu holders, hope for 1 last push higher.  In the PDF, I show a picture of our trading screen. It's a sample showing Cisco Systems, not the jdsu window, but you'll get the idea.  It's called the NASDAQ level 2 screen and it shows all the buyers on the left and sellers on the right.  Our setup trades, mostly with Island B, trade and ARCA, we trade, using hot buttons assigned to the function keys, you set up, your default number of shares, some mindset to a 10000 and the F keys on the left are F1 cell and Island F2, sell on B trade, F3, cell and ARCA. Then to buy, you press F6 F7 and f8. You can operate these Keys very quickly because there's no confirmed. Dialogue, you press F1, you've instantly sold 1,000 shares of whatever stock window you're on, at the best bid available on Island.  It's 3:58 and 50 seconds.  I'm relaxed watching the prices. Been higher and lower in the jdsu window. My PC can barely keep up with the number of quotes and trades being jammed down the pipe but somehow it manages and the information continues to flow smoothly and impossibly fast.  Then I noticed something weird.  Jdsu is 141 bid on island and 1 140 ask on ARCA.  Impossible. And it's not just there for a microc, it's just sitting there guys, you see this everyone's in the zone doing their own thing. Nobody's noticed the discrepancy  I tap F1 and then f8 in succession selling 1,000 shares at 141, buying them back at 140 in less than a second. My p&l clicks, $1,000, higher.  I do it 5 more times in about 5 Seconds.  Still believing. This is probably too good to be true. I check my piano. This must be a mine fart, right wrong. My p&l is 5,000 higher than it was before I made the keystrokes dude. Arbitrage Gosh, I yell out to know 1 in particular, channeling. The 1994 Beastie Boys song Sabotage.  Then I go nuts on the keyboard. F1 f8, F1 f8 F1 f8 F18 as fast as I can F1 f8, F1 f8, like a kid playing the 1980s coin up video game track and field.  I paused for breath. At, check my p&l up another 12,000, and 12 seconds, the island, and ARA feeds both reset at 4:00 because the market makers drop out at the official close. I can do this Arbitrage, till 4 p.m. it's 3:59 and 35 seconds 24 more times. I press the F1 to f8 combo, my pnl jumps, another 24,000 in less than 30 seconds.  My final p&l that day is 48,500 the best day. Anyone had ever realized in that office to that point, everyone gathers around my desk, my heart is pounding Vision. Pulsating, my body points to my p&l. Nice. Ever before, or after that day, did I ever see a market inverted like that again, it was a 1-time deal jdsu, stock never again traded higher than the 4 pm print on that day, July 26th 2000. It went on to lose 99% of its value in the next few years and just for fun. There's a chart in the PDF.  That day was also high water for my p&l and the peak equity for my trading account. The NASDAQ made its final last gasp High, a few weeks later. Never in my life was on more overconfident than in the weeks immediately following that day.  By mid 2002. I shut down my account with the balance below 35,000, and I was out looking for a real job by early, 2003 insult to injury. I had to accept a ridiculous, lowball bid to sell my M3 to pay my rent.  I got crushed by a Confluence of overconfidence and some epic Market altering events. The 2, biggest changes that killed the day. Trading Community, were decimalisation, effective, April. 1 and the collapse in price of every single NASDAQ stock.  My main strategy was to capture the bid offer on high price. Stocks each morning starting at 1999. I printed off, sheets listing, every NASDAQ stock, trading above a hundred dollars in 1999. That list was 4 pages long by 2002 it was 4 stocks.  4 Lessons Learned.  1 markets. Don't stay inefficient forever. The NASDAQ was wildly inefficient from 1998 to 2002. If you find an inefficiency make as much hay as you can, while the sun is shining, then stash away as many nuts as you can for winter.  Winter. Winter is always around the corner 2, if you're overconfident, the market will swiftly and harshly beat that overconfidence out of you 3 trading can be incredibly fun.  4 indexes. Don't tell the full story.  in the PDF, you can see the NASDAQ eventually came roaring back but many single stocks like JDS, To you never did.  Good luck. Be nimble.  Cota.  Remember, the flash crash dollar end story from the start of this book?  In the PDF, you'll find the same story from the start annotated with all the concepts from the book. I hope this demonstrates the way good and bad decisions. Great calls, dumb mistakes, and heaps of Trader bias can all influence a single trading day  Acknowledgements.  Many people helped me write this book. Number 1 on the list is Christine who always supports me and backs my dreams, the 1 who continues to love me despite and also because thank you for caring, all of us, on your back, through the endless half, lit, mind-numbing tunnel of distorted mirrors. That was 2020.  You literally built a house and filled it with love hard work and pumpkin muffin smells and 2. Awesome kids. There is light at the end of the tunnel. I'm pretty sure I can see it now.  Adam, you are a handsome mature young man who's understanding of right and wrong far exceeds mine when I was your age.  You make life better for everyone. You come in contact with and I'm proud to be your dad.  Oliver, you are a super smart funny and huggable little, sloth lover. And I could not love you more than I already do. I am so glad I get to be your dad.  Thanks Mom for playing catch with me when I was 8 for taking me to Croc and block on Thursdays and for giving me total freedom to choose my own life. Thanks Dad for teaching me. There's extraordinary and Unforgettable joy, to be had from Airborne pickles in or outside the jar. I wish there was a way back to Olympic Stadium Circa 1982 so I could keep score with you. At just 1, more Expo game.  Thanks Steve for all the fun and creative interactions over the last few years and for the many gifts of magic. Also, thank you for editing this book. Thanks brother. Craig, the last remaining UNCC Additional Optimist on Earth. Sometimes it feels like the whole world is held together by your optimism. No pressure though.  Our trip to the World Series will always be 1 of my best ever memories?  Thank you, Ben Hunt for the intellectual stimulation and life inspiration. The unmatched writing skill and the non-stop original thought. Thank you for writing and recording the forward to this book.  And thanks to Menahga who crushed my soul, more than once with the ridiculous. Late night, oofy boat overboat so sick.  I appreciate the support of the 5 man who put their name on my book fing it by blurring on my behalf. I put them in alphabetical order because I have a ton of respect for each 1 and I'm secretly super scared of all of them.  Jared, dillian the hardest working, man in finance with new content dropping daily on the inter tubes TV, radio, and SoundCloud.  Dave Floyd, the cool dude from the west coast and a true student in the market, John Malden, whose long, and prolific career, as the epitome of the long run success and out of Ation, I outlined in this book.  Been Milkman the man, the myth, the legend, coolest hedge fund officer in the business. Call level at 05 and dollar Cad and yens Nordic possibly the smartest person I've ever met and definitely the most handsome.  Thanks, Nick, Jonas editor, Supreme Aussie Trader. And number 1, Newcastle born Mets fan, the man who loves trading and a Shane Warne flipper more than almost anything else. His ideas make AMF better each day. Nick had a major role in editing. This book and are on desk conversations, inspired many sections.  Thanks to Justin Ross for the extremely boring and tedious job of editing. This audio book, he does a fantastic job and he is a fantastic human being  Thanks, Matt Thompson, for his rare combo of smartness, generosity courageous, integrity and Ludacris chart, formatting skills.  Gus and Christina, thank you for contributing to this book and for being consistently fun to work with Corby. Thanks for your wisdom and friendship. I'm sorry. You are not better. A Billiards Joe Morrow. Thanks for the keep running inspiration and Twitter hilarity Sal, thanks for all the timely news and ideas and for being an excellent sounding board.  I am grateful for Sam. Pete broco.  Matt Gittens locky wits.  Ben Hunt and the rest of the RNG crew who helped me survive. All those numb Rona nights while stationed abroad in Jersey City, when I was supposed to be riding this book, but longed for distraction human interaction and a bit of fun, 107 off suit so sick that and so helped improve portions of this book. My life is strictly better in the current timeline compared to any timeline where Matt and Sue do not exist. Been Chopra helped me brainstorm a section of this book when I was stuck and he also is just 1 hell of a brainstormer in general. He's also really good at Google.  Bracket BW.  Sad. Thanks for your camaraderie and market knowledge. And for the Deep dive you did, In this book and sorry, I never answered the phone.  And finally, the last shout out goes to you the listener.  Still blows my mind. That after all these years, people still want to listen to what I have to say and read what I have to write. Thank you so much. Peace out.  All right, you did it. That's the end of the book. Thank you so much for listening. If you want more of my stuff, go to Spectre markets.com.  The end.  Audible, hope you have enjoyed this program.