.......__ •:• Appendix A •:• 
A Glossary of Option 
and Related Terminology 
All or None (AON)-An order which must be filled In Its entirety or not at all. 
American Option-An option which can be exercised at any time prior to expiration. 
Arbitrage-The purchase and sale of the same product In different markets to take 
advantage of a prtce disparity between the two markets. 
Asian Option-Average price option. 
Assignment-The process by which the seller of an option Is notified of the buyer's 
lntentlon to exercise. 
At-the-Money-An option whose exercise prtce ls equal to the current price of the 
underlying contract. On llsted option exchanges the term Is more commonly used to 
refer to the option whose exercise prtce ls closest to the current price of the underlying 
contract 
• utomatic Exercise-The exercise by the clearing house of an ln-the-money optlon 
~ expiration, unless the holder of the option submits speclftc Instructions to the 
ontrary. 
Average Price Option-An option whose value at expiration ls determined by the 
average price of the underlying Instrument over some period of time. 
Backspread-A spread, usually delta neutral, where more options are purchased than 
sold, and where all options have the same underlying contract and expire at the same 
time. 
Backwardation-A futures market where the more distant delivery months trade at a 
discount to the nearterm delivery months. 
Barrier Option-An option which will either become effective or cease to exist If the 
underlying Instrument trades at some predetermined prtce prior to expiration. 
4/9 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

420 
Bear Spread-Any spread which will theoretically Increase In value with a decline In 
the price of the underlying contract. 
Box-A long call and shon put at one exercise prtce, together with a short call and long 
put at a different exercise price. All options must have the same underlying contract and 
expire at the same Ume. 
Bull Spread-Any spread which wlll theoretically Increase In value with a rtse In the 
price of the underlying contract. 
Butterfly-The sale (purchase) of two options with the same exercise price, together 
wtth the purchase (sale) of one option with a lower exercise pr1ce and one optJon wlth 
a higher exercise price. All options must be of the same type, have the same undertytng 
contract, and expire at the same time, and there must be an equal Increment between 
exercise prtces. 
Buy/Write-The purchase of an underlying contract together with the sale of a call 
option on that contract. 
Cabinet Bid-On some exchanges, a bid smaller than the minimum Increment, 
pe!Tillsslble between traders desiring to close out positions In very far out-of-the money 
options. 
Calendar Spread-A time spread. 
Call Optfon-A contract between a buyer and a seller whereby the buyer acquires the 
right, but not the obligation, to purchase a specified underlying contract at a fixed pr1ce 
on or before a specified date. The seller of the call option assumes the obligation of 
delivering the underlying contract should the buyer wish to exercise his option. 
Cap-A contract between a borrower and a lender of floating rate funds, whereby the 
borrower Is assured of paying no more than some maximum Interest rate for borrowed 
funds. This Is analogous to a call option where the underlying Instrument Is an interest 
rate on borrowed funds. 
Chooser Option-A straddle where the owner must decide by some predetermined 
date whether to keep either the call or the put. 
Christmas Tree-A spread Involving three exercise pr1ces. One or more calls (puts) 
are purchased at the lowest (highest) exercise price and one or more calls (puts) are sold 
at each of the higher (lower) exercise prices. All options must expire at the same tlme, 
be of the same type, and have the same underlying contract 
Class-All options of the same type with the same expiration date and same underlying 
Instrument. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A Glosu,y of Optton and ReWed Terminology 421 
Clearing House-The organtzatlon which guarantees the lntegrtty of all trades made 
on an exchange. 
Clearing Member-A member firm of an exchange which Is authortzed by the 
clearing house to process trades for Its customers, and which guarantees, through the 
collection of margin and varlatlon monies, the Integrity of Its customers' trades. 
Collar--A contract between a borrower and a lender of floating rate funds, whereby 
the borrower Is assured of paying no more than some maximum Interest rate for 
borrowed funds, and whereby the lender ls assured of receiving no less than some 
minimum Interest rate on loaned funds. This Is analogous to an optlon fence where the 
underlying Instrument ts an Interest rate on borrowed funds. 
Combination-A two-sided optlon spread which does not fall Into any well defined 
category of spreads. Most commonly It ts used to refer to a long call and short put, or 
short call and long put, which together make up a synthetlc posltlon In the underlying 
contract 
Compound Option-An option to purchase an optlon. 
Condor-The sate (purchase) of two options with different exercise prices, together 
with the purchase {sale) of one option with a lower exercise prtce and one option with 
a hlgher exercise price. All options must be of the same type, have the same underlying 
contract, and expire at the same tlme, and there must be an equal Increment between 
exercise prtces. 
Contango-A futures market where the more distant delivery months trade at a 
premium to the nearterm delivery months. 
Contingency Order-An order which becomes effective only upon the fulfillment of 
some predetermined condttlon(s) in the marketplace. 
Conversion-A long underlying position together with a short call and long put, where 
both options have the same exercise price and expire at the same time. 
Covered Write-The sale of a call (put) option against an existing long (short) position 
1n the underlying contract. 
Cylinder-A fence or collar. 
Def erred Start Option-A forward start optlon. 
Delta (£\)-The sensitivity of an option's theoretical value to a change ln the price of 
the underlying contract. 
Delta Neutral-A position where the sum total of all the positive and negative deltas 
adds up to approximately zero. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

422 AppendtxA 
Diagonal Spread-A long call (put) at one exercise price and exptratJon date, together 
with a short call (put) at a different exercise price and explratlon date. All optioru must 
have the same underlying stock or commodity. This Is simply a tlme spread using 
dlff erent exercise prices. 
Elasticity-The percent change In an option's value for a given percent change In the 
value of the underlying Instrument. Sometimes referred to as the leverage value. 
Exchange Option-An optlon to exchange one asset for another asset. 
Ex-dfvidend-The day on which a dlvldend paying stock ls trading without the right 
to receive the dlvldend. 
Exercise-The process by which the holder of an option notifies the seller of hls 
lntentlon to take delivery of the underlying contract, ln the case of a call, or to make 
delivery of the underlying contract, In the case of a pu~ at the speclfled exercise price. 
Exercise Price-The price at which the underlying contract will be delivered In the 
event an option ls exercised. 
Expiration (Explry)-The date and time after which an option may no longer be 
exercised. 
European Option-An option which may only be exercised at expiration. 
ExtrinSic Value-Time value. 
Fair Value-Theoretical value. 
Fence-A long (short) underlying position, together wtth a long (short) out-of-the­
money put and a short (long) out-of-the-money call. All options must expire at the same 
time. 
Fill or Kill (FOK}-An order which will automatically be cancelled unless It can be 
executed Immediately and In Its entirety. 
Flex Option-An exchange-traded option where the buyer and seller are permitted to 
negotiate the exact tenns of the option contract Typically, this Includes the exercise 
price, the expiration date, and the terms of exercise (either European or American). 
Floor--A contract between a borrower and a lender of floating rate funds, whereby the 
lender ts assured of recelvlng no less than some minimum Interest rate for loaned funds. 
Tots ts analogous to a put option where the underlying instrument ts an interest rate on 
loaned funds. 
Fo1Ward Contract-A contract between a buyer and a seller whereby the buyer ls 
obllgated to take delivery and the seller ls obligated to make delivery of a fixed amount 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.... 
A Glosury of Option and Rtlated Terminology 423 
of a commodlty at a predetermined prtce on a specified future date. Payment In full ls 
due at the tlme of delivery. 
Forward Price-Taking into consideration all carrying costs on a contract, the price at 
whlch a contract would have to be trading on some future date such that a trade made 
at today's price would just break even. 
Forward Start Option-An option whose exercise price will be equal to the price of 
the underlying Instrument on some predetermined date. 
Front Spread-A ratio vertical spread. 
Fugit-The expected amount of time remaining to optimum early exercise of an 
American option. 
Futures Contract-A contract, usually exchange-traded, between a buyer and a seller 
whereby the buyer Is obligated to take delivery and the seller Is obligated to make 
delivery of a fixed amount of a commodity at a predetermined price on some future date. 
All profits and losses are realized Immediately, and result In a cash credit or debit based 
on dally changes In the settlement price of the contract. 
Futures-Type Settlement-A settlement procedure used by commodity exchanges 
whereby an Initial margin deposit Is made, but under which no Immediate cash payment 
Is made by the buyer to the seller. Cash settlement takes place at the end of each trading 
day based on the difference between the current day's settlement prtce and the previous 
day's settlement prtce or the original trade price. 
Gamma {r)-The sensltivlty of an option's delta to a change In the price of the 
nderlylng contract 
, Good 'til Cancelled {GTC)-An order to be held by a broker until It can either be 
executed or ls cancelled by the customer. 
Guts-A strangle where both the call and the put are In-the-money. 
Haircut-On equity option exchanges, money deposited by a trader with the clearing 
house to ensure the Integrity of his trades. This Is similar to a margin requirement on a 
commodity exchange. 
Hedge Ratio-Delta 
Hedgel'-A trader who enters the market with the specific Intent of protecting an 
exJstlng position In an underlying contract. 
Horizontal Spread-A time spread. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

424 ApperrltxA 
lmmedJate or Cancel (IOC)-An order which will automatically be cancelled ff J h 
not filled Immediately. An IOC order need not be filled In Its entirety. 
Implied Volatility-Assuming all other Inputs are known, the volatlllty which would 
have to be Input Into a theoretical pricing model In order to yield a theoretical value 
Identical to the price of the option In the marketplace. 
In-Option-A type of barrier option which becomes effective only if the undertytng 
Instrument trades at some predetermined price prior to expiration. 
In-Price-The price at which the underlying Instrument must trade before an In-option 
becomes effective. 
In-the-Money-A call (put) option whose exercise price Is lower (higher) than the 
current price of the underlying contract. 
Index Arbitrage-One of several strategies attempting to take advantage of the 
relative mlsprlclng of options, futures contracts, or the physical stocks underlying a stock 
index. 
Intermarket Spread-A spread consisting of opposing market positions in two differ­
ent underlying securities or commodities, or their derivative products. 
Intrinsic Value-The amount by which an option ls in-the-money. Out-of-the-money 
options have no Intrinsic value. 
Iron Butterfly-A long (short) straddle, together With a short (long) strangle. All 
options must expire at the same time and have the same underlying contract 
Jelly Roll (Roll}-A long call and short put with one expiration date, together with a 
short call and long put with a different expiration date. All four options must have the 
same exercise price and same underlying stock or commodity. 
Kappa (K)-Vega. 
Knock Out Option-An out-option 
Ladder-A Christmas tree. 
Long-Term Equity Anticipation Security (LEAPS}-A long-term (usually more 
than one year) exchange traded equity option. 
Leg-One side of a spread position. 
Umit-The maximum allowable price movement over some time period for an 
exchange traded contract. 
Umit Order-An order to be executed at a specified price or better. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A Glossary of Option and Rel,ted Terminology 425 
Local-An Independent trader on a commodity exchange. Locals perform functions 
similar to market makers on stock and stock option exchanges. 
Locked Market-A market where trading has been halted because prices have 
reached their limit. 
Long-A position resulting from the purchase of a contract. The term Is also used to 
describe a position which will theoretically Increase (decrease) In value should the prtce 
of the underlying contract rise (fall). Note that a long (short) put posltlon is a short (long) 
market position. 
Long Premium-A position which will theoretically Increase In value should the 
underlying contract make a large move ln either direction. The posltlon will theoreti­
cally decrease ln value should the underlying market sit stlll. 
Long Ratio Spread-A backspread. 
Look Back Option-An option whose exercise price will be equal to either the lowest 
price of the underlying instrument, in the case of a call, or the highest price of the 
underlying instrument, in the case of a put, over the life of the option. 
Margin-Money deposited by a trader with the clearing house to ensure the integrity 
of his trades. 
Market Maker-An independent trader or trading flnn which stands ready to buy or 
sell contracts in a designated market. Market makers perform duties similar to locals on 
commodity exchanges, the primacy difference being that a market maker ls obligated to 
make a two-sided (bld and ask) market in his designated contract 
farket If Touched (MIT)-A contingency order which becomes a market order if 
Jle contract trades at or beyond a specified price. 
Market On Close (MOC)-An order to be executed at the current market prtce as 
near as possible to the close of that day's trading. 
Market Order-An order to be executed immediately at the current market price. 
Naked-A long (short) market position with no offsetting short (long) market position. 
Neutral Spread-A spread which ls delta neutral. A spread may also be lot neutral, 
where the total number of long contracts and short contracts of the same type are equal. 
Not Held-An order submitted to a broker, but over which the broker has discretion 
as to when and how the order ls executed. 
Omega (0)-The Greek letter sometimes used to denote an option's elasticity. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

426 
ApPefltJ 
~~ 
one cancels the Other (OCO)-Two orders submitted simultaneou s! 
wh\ch may be e,:ecuted. 1f one order ls executed, the other Is automatlcait either 0 Y canceuetl' 
Order Book Official (OBO)-An exchange offlclal responsible for execuun • 
or l\m\t orders for public customers. g rnar\et 
Out-of •the-Money-An optlon whlch currently has no lntrinslc value. A cau 
out-of-the-money \f \ts exercise prlce ls more (less) than the current Price IPllt\ 15 
underlying contract. of the 
Out-Option-A type of barrier optlon which ls deemed to have exptrect If 
underlying instrument trades at some predetermined prtce prior to expiration. the 
I 
Out-Price-The price at which the underlying instrument must trade before an 
optton ts deemed to have expired. 011t 
Out-trade-A trade which cannot be processed by the clearing house due to confllctin 
tnformatton reported by the two parties to the trade. g 
OvelWrite-The sale of an option against an existing position in the undertytn 
contract. g 
Parity-Intrtnslc value. 
Pin Risk-The risk to the seller of an option that at expiration the option will be exactly 
at-the-money. The seller wm not know whether the option will be exercised. 
Portfolio Insurance-A process whereby the quantity of holdln~ in an underlying 
instrument ls continuously adjusted to replicate the characteristics of an option on the 
underlying instrument 
Position-The sum total of a trader's open contracts in a particular underlying market. 
Position Limit-For an individual trader or firm, the maximum number of open 
contracts in the same underlying market permitted by an exchange or clearing house. 
Premium-The price of an option. 
Program Trading-An arbitrage strategy lnvolvlng the purchase or sale of a misprtced 
stock index futures contract against an opposing position in the stocks underlying the 
index. 
Put Option-A contract between a buyer and a seller whereby the buyer acquires the 
right, but not the obligation, to sell a specified underlying contract at a fixed price on or 
before a speclfled date. The seller of the put option assumes the obligation of taking 
delivery of the underlying contract should the buyer wish to exercise his option. 
Range FotWard-A fence. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A Glossa,y of Option and Related Terminology 427 
Ratio Backspread-A backspread. 
Ratio Spread-Any spread where the number of long market contracts (long underly· 
tng, long call, or shott put) and short market contracts (short underlying, short call, or 
long put) are unequal. 
Ratio Vertical Spread-A spread, usually delta neutral, where more options are sold 
than are purchased, and where all options have the same underlying contract and expire 
at the same time. 
Ratio Write-The sale of multiple options against an existing position In an underlying 
contract This ls simply a covered write using more than one option. 
Reverse Conversion (Reversal)-A short underlying position together with a long 
can and short put, where both options have the same exercise price and expire at the 
same time. 
Rho (p )-The sensitivity of an option's theoretical value to a change In Interest rates. 
Risk Conversion (Risk Reversal)-A fence which includes a long (short) underlying 
position. 
Roll-A jelly roll. 
Scalper-A floor trader on an exchange who hopes to profit by continually buying at 
the bid price and selling at the offer price In a specific market. Scalpers usually try to 
close out all positions at the end of each trading day. 
Serial Expiration-On commodity exchanges, options on the same futures contract 
-vhlch expire in more than one month. 
,-rfes-All options with the same underlying contract, same exercise price, and same 
xpiratlon date. 
Short-A position resulting from the sale of a contract. The term ls also used to describe 
a position which will theoretically Increase (decrease) In value should the price of the 
underlying contract fall (rise). Note that a short (long) put position Is a long (short) 
market position. 
Short Premium-A position which will theoretically Increase In value should the 
underlying contract sit still. The position will theoretically decrease in value should the 
underlying contract make a large move In either direction. 
Short Ratio Spread-A ratio vertical spread. 
Short Squeeze-A situation in the stock option market, usually resulting from a partial 
tender offer, where no stock can be borrowed to maintain a short stock position. If 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

428 ApptrwllxA 
assigned on a short call position, a trader may be forced to exercise a call early In order 
to fulflll hts delivery obligations, even though the call stlll has some t1me value 
remaining. 
Sigma (o}-The commonly used notation for standard deviation. Since volatlllty ls 
usually expressed as a standard devtatlon, the same notatlon Is often used to denote 
volattllty. 
Specialist-A market maker given exclusive rights by an exchange to make a market 
In either a specified contract or group of contracts. A specialist may buy or sell for his 
own account, or act as a broker for others. In return, a specialist Is required to maintain 
a fair and orderly market. 
Speculator-A trader who hopes to profit from a specific dlrectlonal move in an 
underlying contract 
Spread-A long market position and an offsetting short market Position usually, but 
not always, In the same underlying market. 
Stock-Type Settlement-A settlement procedure in which the purchase of a contract 
requires full and immediate payment by the buyer to the seller. All profits or losses from 
the trade are unrealized untll the position ls liquidated. 
Stop Limit Order-A contingency order which becomes a limit order if the contract 
trades at a specified prtce. 
Stop (Loss) Order-A contingency order which becomes a market order if the con­
tract trades at a specified price. 
Straddle-A long (short) call and a long (short) put, where both options have the same 
underlying contract, the same expiration date, and the same exercise price. 
Strangle-A long (short) call and a long (short) put, where both options have the same 
underlying contract, the same expiration date, but different exercise prices. 
Strap-An archaic term for a position consisting of two long (short) calls and one long 
(short) put where all options have the same underlying contract, the same expiration 
date, and the same exercise price. 
Strike Price (Strike }-Exercise price. 
Strip-An archaic term for a position consisting of one long (short) call and two long 
(short) puts where all options have the same underlying contract, the same expiration 
date, and the same exercise prtce. Also: A sertes of futures or futures options designed 
to replicate the characteristics of a long-term contract or option. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

..., A Glos.WY of Option and Related Terminology 42() 
swap-An agreement to exchange different cash flows. Most commonly a swap 
involves exchanging variable rate Interest payments for payments calculated from a 
nxed interest rate. 
swaption-An option to enter Into a swap agreement. 
Synthetic-A combination of contracts having approximately the same charactenstlcs 
as a different contract. 
Synthetic Call-A long (short) underlying position together with a long (short) put. 
Synthetic Put-A short (long) underlying position together with a long (short) call. 
Synthetic Underlying-A long (short) call and short (long) put, where both options 
have the same underlying contract, the same expiration date, and the same exercise 
price. 
Tau ('t)-The commonly used notation for the amount of time remaining to expiration. 
Theoretical Value-An option value generated by a mathematical model given cer­
tain prior assumptions about the terms of the option, the characteristics of the underly­
ing contract, and prevailing interest rates. 
Theta (8)-The sensitivity of an option's theoretical value to a change in the amount 
of time remaining to expiration. 
Three-Way-A position similar to a conversion or reversal, but where the long or short 
')OSition in the underlying instrument has been replaced with a very deeply-ln-the-
oney call or put. 
Time Box-A long call and short put with the same exercise price and expiration date, 
together with a short call and long put at a different exercise price and expiration date. 
This is simply a jelly roll using different exercise prices. 
Time Premium-Time value. 
Time Spread-The purchase (sale) of one option expiring on one date and the sale 
(purchase) of another option expiring on a different date. Typically, both options are of 
the same type, have the same exercise price, and have the same underlying stock or 
commodity. 
Time Value-The price of an option less its Intrinsic value. The price of an out-of-the­
money option consists solely of time value. 
Type-Toe designation of an option as either a call or a put. 
Underlying -The Instrument to be delivered in the event an option ls exercised . 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

430 
Variation-The cash flow resulting each day from changes In the settlement prtce ot a 
futures contract 
Vega-The sensitivity of an option's theoretical value to a change In volatlllty. 
Vertical Spread-The purchase of one option and sale or one option, where both 
opUons are of the same type, have the same underlying contract, and expire at the same 
time, but have different exercise prices. 
VolaWJty-The degree to whlch the prtce of an underlytng Instrument tends to 
fluctuate over time. 
Volatility Skew-The tendency of options at different exercise prtces to trade at 
different lmpUed volatilities. 
Wamnt-A long-term call option. The explratlon date of a warrant may under some 
circumstances be extended by the issuer. 
Write-Sell an option. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

► •:• Append.ix B •:• 
The Mathematics 
of Option Pricing 
OPl'ION PRICING MODELS 
I. The Black-Scholes Model and Its Variations 
Abbreviations used in the following mathematical formulae: 
C = theoretical value of a call 
p = theoretical value of a put 
u = price of the underlying contract 
E = exercise price 
t = time to expiration in years 
V = annual volatility expressed as a decimal fraction 
r = risk-free interest rate expressed as a decimal fraction 
e = base of the natural logarithm 
In = natural logarithm 
N'(x) = the normal distribution curve 
= _1_ e(-r/2) 
✓27t 
N(x) = the cumulative normal density function {the area under N'(x)) 
A The Black-Scholes Model for evaluating European options on non-dividend paying 
stocks {U = price of the underlying stock):1 
C = UN(h) -Ee-11 N(h-vvt) 
P = -UN(-h) + Ee-rt N(vvt-h) 
where h = m(¥)+(r+1)i 
vv't 
1. Blaclc, Fischer and Scholes, Myron, MThe Pricing of Options and Coll)Orate Uabllltles, • Journal of 
Pollttcal Economy, Vol. 8 I, No. 3, May/June t 973, pages 637-()54. 
431 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 2 ApptndlxB 
For tock which pay dividends, the stock price (UJ can be replaced by the curren sco k 
prlc I ss th pres nt value of the expected dividends: 
n 
U = L d,e-tt(l) 
J-1 
where ~ = each expected dividend payout over 
the llf e of the option 
~ = the time In years to each dividend payout 
The sensitivities of the Black-Scholes Model are: 
call delta = N(h) 
put delta = -N(-h) 
call gamma = 
call theta = 
put theta = 
call vega = 
call rho = 
put rho = put gamma N'(h) 
= uvft 
Uv N'(h) + rEe-rt N(h -Wt) 
2{f 
Uv N'(h) -rEe-rt N(v--ft -h) 
2-rr 
put vega = Uft°N'(h) 
tEe-rlN(h-vft°) 
-tEe-rtN(v--ft-h) 
B. The Black Model for evaluating European options on futures contracts (U = price of 
the futures contract):2 
C = Ue-rt N(h) -Ee-rt N(h -Wt) 
P = -Ue-rt N(-h) + Ee-rt N(v-/t -h) 
where h = In(f)+ft 
v..ft 
The sensitivities of the Black Model are: 
call delta = e-r'N(h) 
put delta = --e-rtN(-h) 
call gamma = put gamma e-rt N'(h) = UV'ft 
call theta = -rue-rt N(h) + rEe-rt N(h -v-ft) + Ue-rt vN'(h)/2'/t 
put theta = rUe-rt N(-h) -rEe-rt N(V\lt-h) + Ue-rt vN'(h)/2'/t 
2. Black, Fischer, "The Pricing of Commodity Contracts", Journal of Financial Economics, No. 3, J 976, 
pages I 67-179. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

► '(he Mathematics of Option Pricing 
call vega = 
call rho = 
put rho = put vega 
-tC 
-tP 4.33 
= 
C The Garman Koh/hagen Mode/for evaluating European options on foreign curren­
cl~s (U = price of the foreign currency In domestic currency units):3 
c = ue-r,t N(h) -Ee-rd1 N(h-v..ft) 
P : -U·1,1N(-h) + Ee-fdlN(eft-h) 
In(¥) + ( rrr1+~:)t 
where h = v-ft 
r4 = the risk-free rate in the domestic currency 
r, = the risk-free rate in the foreign currency 
The sensitivities of the Garman-Kohlhagen Model are: 
call delta 
put delta 
call gamma 
call theta 
put theta 
call vega = put vega 
call domestic rho 
put domestic rho 
call foreign rho 
put foreign rho = e-r1tN(h) 
= -e-1t1N(-h) 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= e-1t1N1(h) 
put gamma = ueft 
r,ue-rl N(h) -rdEe-1dt N(h-vft) - U ri1 vN' (h)/2..ft 
-r,ue-1,1 N(-h) + rdErd1 N(V"lt-h) -Ue-rl vN'(h)/2..ft 
Ue-1,t N'(h)..ft 
te-1d1EN(h-..ft) 
-te-rdtEN(..ft-h) 
-te-rt1EN(h) 
te-r,1EN(-h) 
Notes: The theta in the foregoing formulae ls expressed in terms of decay over one full 
year. To express the theta in the more common form of dally decay, the resulting 
number must be dlvlded by 365. 
The vega ls expressed in terms of the sensitivity to a one-full-point ( 100-percent­
age-polnt) change in volatility. To express the vega in the more common form of the 
sensltlvlty to a one-percentage-point change in volatlllty, the resulting number must be 
divided by 100. 
3-Garman, Mark B. and Ko~, Steven W., Mf,oreJgn Currency Option Values•, Journal of 
lnttrnattonal Money and Finance, Vol 2, No. 3, December 1983, pages 231-237. 
Crabbe, J. Orlin, MThe Pricing of Call and Put Options on R>re1gn Exchan~•, Journal of International 
Money and Finance, Vol 2, No. 3, December 1983, pages 239-253. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.,, 4 AppendlxB 
D. Darren Wilcox has suggested a varlaUon on the Black Model where the underlying 
contract (U) Is assumed to be normally distributed and may therefore take on negative 
values.4 
where h = C = e-rt(U-E)N(h) + e-rt N'(h)v✓t 
P = e-rt(U-E)N(h) + e-rtN(h)v✓t -e-rt(U-E) 
U-E 
v../f 
Note: Since this variation assumes a normal, rather than lognormal, distribution, the 
volatility, v, is the standard deviation of absolute price changes, rather than the standard 
deviation of logarithmic price changes. 
The only difficulty in using the Black-Scholes Model or its variations is the 
calculation of N(x), the cumulative normal density function. Values for N(x) can be 
found in most statistical tables. Alternatively, the following approximation is suitable for 
most practical applications: 
If x ~ 0, then 
N(x) = 1-N'(x)(.4361836k- .1201676k2 + .9372980k3) 
where k = 1/(1 + .332671 x I) 
and N'(x) is the normal distribution curve previously described. 
If x < 0, then N(x) = 1 -N(x) 
n. The Cox-Ross-Rubenstein (Binomial) Modet5 
The Cox-Ross-Rubenstein Model makes the assumption that over any period of time the 
underlying contract can move up (u) or down (d) by a given amount. The probability of 
an up move is given by p, and the probability of a down move is given by 1 - p. For 
example, suppose a certain contract is trading at 100, and over the next time period the 
contract will move up to 105 (u=5) or down to 95 (d=-5), and that there is a 50 percent 
chance (p=.5) of either outcome. If this is the only time period remaining to expiration, 
and there are no interest considerations, we can calculate the value of a 100 call as its 
expected return at the end the period. The call is worth intrinsic value if the underlying 
contract is above the exercise price, and zero if the underlying contract is below the 
exercise price. Its expected return is: 
.5 X (105-100) + 0 = 2.50 
4. Wilcox, Darren, "Spread Options in Energy Markets", Research Paper, Goldman, Sachs & Co., March 
1990. 
5. Cox, John C.; Ross, Stephen A.; and Rubenstein, Mark; "Option Pricing: A Simplified Approach"; 
Journal of Financial Economics; No. 7, 1979; pages 229-263 
For a good dtscus.slon of the computation required, see: Meisner, James E. and l.abuszewski, John w .; 
"The Cox-Ross-Rubenstein Model for Alternative Underlying Instruments"; Advances In Futures 
and Optfons Research; Vol. 2, 1987; pages 263-278 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

► r,,e Mathematics of Option Pricing 435 
In the same way we can calculate the value of a 90 call as: 
.5 X (105-90) + .5 X (95-90) = )0 
We can extend this approach by dividing the time to expiration Into many small 
pertods, and assume that over each period the underlying contract will always move up 
(u) or down (d). The result at expiration will be a btnomtal tree, with many possible 
prices at expiration for the underlying contract. An example of a three-period binomial 
tree is shown In Figure B-1. 
If we assume that the probability, p, of an up move and the probablllty, 1-p, of a 
down move, is the same at each node of the binomial tree, It Is a simple matter to 
calculate the probablllty of each prtce outcome at expiration. The expected return for 
the option is the sum, for each outcome where the option Is In-the-money, of the 
difference between the option's exercise prtce and the underlying price, multiplied by 
the probabllity of that outcome. All outcomes where the option ls out-of-the-money are 
set to zero. 
In order to create a binomial tree which will approximate a lognormal distribution 
we can define the following: 
u = eeftlri 
d = 1/u 
where n = the number of periods to expiration (the number of 
branches on the binomial tree) 
Figure B-1 
A 3 Period Binomial Tree 
u = +5 
d = -5 
/ 110 
105 / 
100 100 
95 
90 115 (100 call= 15) 
105 (100 call = 5) 
95 (100 call = 0) 
85 (100 call = 0) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 6 AppemlxB 
v = the annual votaUllty of the underlying contract 
t = the time to expiration In years 
As n becomes very large, the resulUng terminal prices of the binomial tree converge to 
a lognonnal dlstJibutlon. 
The probability, p, of an up move Is determined by the requirement that the 
underlying market be artltrage·free, I.e., that no profit can be made trading the 
underlying contract. If there are no Interest considerations, which ls the case with a 
futures contract, we can ensure that the underlying futures market ls arbitrage-free by 
defining the probablllty, p, of an up move as: 
p = ( 1 ·d)/(u·d) 
In an arbitrage-free stock market, the stock prtce must increase by the amount of 
carrying costs over each period. If r is the rlsk-free rate, the rate, rr, by which the stock 
price must increase over each period is: 
rr = 1 + (rt/n) 
We can ensure that the underlying stock market is arbitrage-free by defining the 
probability, p, as: 
p = (rr-<1)/(u-<i) 
Rnally, we must discount the expected return for the option by the carrying costs over 
the life of the option by multiplying the expected return by 1/(rr)n. 
The basic form of the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein Model Is: 
C = _L[i n! pk(l-p)n--kmax(O ukctn--tU-E)] 
(rr)n k!(n-k)! ' 
k=O 
P = (:)" [ ~ kl(;~k)! pk(l-p)n-tmax(O,E-ukdn-kU)1 
In order to use the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein Model to evaluate an American option, 
we need to check whether at the beginning of each time pertod the value of the option 
is such that early exercise ls warranted. For example, ln our two-period example with 
the underlying at 100, we saw that the expected return for the 90 call was 10. If the 
option were settled ln cash, the theoretical value of the option would be 10 less the 
carrying costs over the holding pertod. If the carrying costs were .25, the theoretical 
value of the option would be 9.75. If, however, the option were American, everyone 
would exercise the option ln order to obtain 10 points right now. In other words, the 
fact that the option ls American would require us to set the theoretical value at 10. 
If we define U(l,j) as the jth underlying price at the end of the tth time pertod (see 
Figure B-2), and C(i,j) or P(l,i) as the call or put value at each U(l,j), then we must check 
to see whether each C(l,j) < U (l,j)-E, if we are evaluating an American call, or whether 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

'{he MathemAtfcs of Option Pricing 437 
Figure B-2 
U(4,0) 
U(i,j) is the jth underlying price U(3,0) at the end of the Ith period 
U(2,0) U(4, 1) 
U(1,0) U(3, 1) 
U(2, 1) U(4,2) 
U(1, 1) U(3,2) 
U(2,2) U(4,3) 
U(O,O) is the current price U(3,3) of the underlying contract 
U(4,4) 
each P(i,j) < E-U(i,j), if we are evaluating an American put If either condition Is true 
the option becomes an early exercise canditate, and we set the value of C(i,j) equal to 
U(i,j)-E, or the value of P(l,j) equal to E-U(i,i). 
We begin by calculating each terminal value U(n,j) for i=O, ... ,n. From these values 
we can calculate the value of the option at each previous node, C(n-1 ,j) or P(n-1,j) for 
j=O, ... ,n-1. If C(n-1,j) turns out to be less than U(n-1,i)-E, or If P(n-1,j) turns out to be 
less than E·U(n-1,j), the option value is set to parity, and the Iterative procedure 
continues. We continue to work backwards to C(0,0) or P(0,0) (the current value of the 
call or put), always setting the value at each node, U(i,j), to maxlC(i,j), U(l,j)-EJ for a call, 
or max!P(l,j), E·U(l,j)J for a put: 
C(i, I) = max [pC(i + 1, i) + (1 ~ Pl C (I+ 1' i + 1) ' U(i, D -E] 
P(l,j) = max[pP(i+l ,I) + (l;p)P(i+l,j+l) 'E-U(l,j)] 
Since the delta of an option Is Its change In value for a given change In the price of 
the underlying contract, we can also calculate call and put deltas from a binomial model: 
call A = C(l,1)-C(l,0) 
U(l,1)-U(l,0) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 8 
P(l,1)-P(l,0) 
put A = U(l, 1) -U(l ,0) 
The larger n Is chosen, the more accurate the option value generated by the mod 
will be. Unfortunately, as n Increases, the number of calculations required to evaJua el 
an Amertcan option Increases geometrically. Most traders who use the Cox-Ross-RUb~ 
stein model choose n somewhere between 25 and 50. This represents a reasonable 
trade-off between computer time and accuracy. 
m. The Whaley (Quadratic) Model6 
The Whaley Model uses an approximation technique to estimate the critical Price, u· 
at which an American option should optimally be exercised early. This critical Price 1; 
then used to determine the value of the option. 
In order to find u• for a call, we must solve the equation: 
E -u· = eOH)t[U•N(h)-EN(h-vft)J + [(1-e(b--r)tN(h-vft))(U•/qi)J 
(For convenience we will refer to the two sides of this equation as LHS [the left-hand 
side! and RHS [the light-hand sldeJ.) 
where b = carrying costs on the underlying instrument (for futures 
h = 
q2 = 
M = 
N = 
k = b = 0; for stock b = r) and all other abbreviations are those 
used in the Black-Scholes Model 
1n(f )+ (b+t} 
irft 
HN-1) + ✓~((N---1)~2 +-4M/-k-)J/2 
2r/v2 
2b/v2 
1-e-rt 
To solve for u• we pick a desired degree of accuracy, £, satisfying: 
(LHS -RHS) / E < £ 
We then perform progressive iterations, each time replacing u• 1 with: 
U•,., =IE+ RHS-b1U• 11 / (l-b1) 
where b1 = e(l>-r>t N(hU•,)(1-1/q2} + [t-e{b-r>t N'(hU•J(V"!t)J/q2 
Once u• has been calculated to the desired degree of accuracy, the value of an 
American call, C, and its delta, A, can be found by solving: 
C = c + .Ai(U/U•)42J 
6. Barone-Ades!, Giovanni and Whaley, Robert E., "Efficient Analytic Approximation of American Option 
Values,• Jourra/ o/Flndnce, Vol 42, No. 2, June 1987, pages 301-320. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

'fht MathemAtlcs of Option Pricing 43() 
I::. = 6 + A2qi(U/U•)q2/U 
where c = the value of a European call 
6 = the delta of a European call 
A2 = (U"/q2)1l-elb•r)tN(hU")I 
In order to find U" for a put, we must solve the equation 
E -u· = e(k)t IEN(h-vvt)- u·N(h)J -1(1 -e(l>-r)l N(h))(U• /q,)J 
(We again refer to the two sides of this equation as LHS [the left-hand sldeJ and RHS !the 
right-hand sideJ.) 
where b = carrying costs on the underlying Instrument (for futures 
h = 
q, = 
M = 
N = 
k = b = 0; for stock b = r) and all other abbreviations are those 
used in the Black-Scholes Model 
-m(f) + ( b+f} 
rft 
HN-1) -✓,....,( (N,.-:---....,....1 )-:--2 +----:-:-4M/~k) ]/2 
2r/v2 
2b/v2 
1-e-rt 
To solve for U" we pick a desired degree of accuracy, £, satisfying: 
(LHS -RHS) / E < £ 
We then peiform progressive Iterations, each time replacing U"1 with: 
U"i+t = IE· RHS • b1U"1l / (l ·b1) 
where b1 = e(IH'>t N(hU•,)(1-l/q1) + 11-e(IH'>t N'(hU•,)/(V'ft)l/q1 
Once U" has been calculated to the desired degree of accuracy, the value of an 
American put, P, and Its delta, '1, can be found by solving: 
where p 
6 
A, p = p + A,(U/U·)ql 
A = 6 + A1q1(U/U•)q1/U 
= the value of a European put 
= the delta of a European put 
= -(U"/qi)lt-elb-rllN(hU")I 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

440 
NORMAL DISTRIBUTIONS 
Since the assumption that price changes are normally distributed plays such an im 
tant role In many theoretical pricing models, It may be useful to know how to com:r• 
some of the numbers associated with a normal distribution. te 
TheMean(m) 
The mean (m) of a distribution of n occurrences Is the average outcome of all the 
occurrences (~): 
n 
m = .!. Ix1 n 
i=l 
The Standard Deviation ( cr) 
The standard deviation (o) of a distribution of n occurrences Is defined as:7 
a=✓ i In -(x -m)2 
n-1 I 
I= I 
If a distribution is normal, approximately 68.3 percent of the occurrences fall 
within one standard deviation of the mean, approximately 95.5 percent of the occur­
rences fall within two standard deviations of the mean, and approximately 99 .7 percent 
of the occurrences fall within three standard deviations of the mean. 
Skewness (Sic) and Kurtosis (Ku) 
If a distribution Is approximately normal, it may be useful to know how the distribution 
deviates from a true normal distribution. We can determine this by computing the 
skewness and kurtosis of the distribution. 
Many of the measures associated with a distribution are derived from a group of 
numbers called moments. In general, the jth moment of a distribution about the mean 
is: 
n 1 m1 = ii I, (x1 -m)I 
i= 1 
To determine the skewness and kurtosis of a distribution, we need the second, third, 
and fourth moments: 
7. Because we are dlv1dlng by (n· 1) this ls technically the sample srandmi deviation This Js the form 
which ls most commonly used for volatility calculations. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The MathemAtlcs of Option Pricing 441 
1 n 
ffi4 = n L (X1 -m)4 
1=1 
The skewness of a distribution Is defined as: 
skewness= l 
ffi2 ffi2 
A perfectly nonnal distribution has a skewness of zero. If the distribution Is positively 
skewed (Sk > 0), the right tall ls longer than the left. If the distribution Is negatively 
skewed (Sk < 0), the left tall Is longer than the light. 
The kurtosis of a distribution is defined as: 
ffi4 kurtosis = -2 -3 
m2 
A perfectly normal distribution has kurtosis of zero (mesokurtlc). If a distribution has a 
positive kurtosis (Ku> 0), more occurrences fall In the middle and at the extreme tails 
of the distribution (leptokurtlc). If a distribution has a negative kurtosis (Ku< 0), fewer 
occurrences fall in the middle and at the extreme tails of the distribution (platykurtlc). 
While almost all spreadsheets Include the mean and standard deviation functions, 
and many also Include skewness and kurtosis, it may be worthwhile to do a sample 
calculation. 
Consider, for example, the pinball distribution In Figure 4-2 (reproduced in Figure 
B-3). In order to compute the mean, we must multiply the number of balls in each 
trough by the number of the trough, add up the total (563), and divide by the total 
number of balls (75): 
mean= 563/75 = 7.507 
To compute the standard deviation, for each ball we square the difference between 
its trough and the mean, add up all 75 results, divide by the number of occurrences less 
one (7 4), and take the square root of this number. 
standard deviation = ✓_I_ I (Xi_ m)2 
n-1 
1=1 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

r :.cc i ,r 
~ ~ 
Figure 8-3 ~ 
Deviation Numberof 
Trough Number of from DevlaUon Occurnnces 
Number Occurrences Value the Mean Squared x0evlallon2 
0 0 0 -7.507 56.350 0 
1 2 2 -6.507 42.337 84.673 
2 2 4 -5.507 30.323 60.647 
3 3 9 -4.507 20.310 60.930 
4 5 20 -3.507 12.297 61.484 
5 7 35 -2.507 6.283 43.984 
6 8 48 -1.507 2.270 18.160 
7 10 70 -.507 .0257 2.567 
8 10 80 .493 .243 2.434 
9 9 81 1.493 2.230 20.070 
10 7 70 2.493 6.217 43.517 
11 6 66 3.493 12.203 73.220 
12 3 36 4.493 20.190 60.570 
13 1 13 5.493 30.1n 30.177 
14 1 14 6.493 42.163 42.163 
15 ....1 15 7.493 56.150 56.150 ~ 
75 563 660.747 I .::, 
Q. R" 
Cb 
-----·---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

► 17rt Mathematics of Option Pricing 
= ✓660.747 
74 
= ✓8.929 
= 2.988 443 
While a detailed calculation of the skewness and kurtosis would require an 
inordinate amount of space, the relevant values are: 
skewness 
kurtosis = = = 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= 
= = 8.810 
.185 
213.455 
8.810~ 
.185 
26.149 
+.007 (the right tall is slightly longer than the left) 
m4 -3 
m2 2 
213.455 _ 3 8.8102 
2.750-3 
-.250 (the distribution has a slightly flatter peak 
than one would expect) 
VOLATILITY CALCULATIONS 
Historical Volatility 
The historical volatility ls defined as the standard deviation of the logartthmlc prtce 
changes measured at regular Intervals of time. Since settlement prices are usually 
considered the most reliable, the most common method of computing volatility involves 
using settlement-to-settlement price changes. We define each price change (x1) as: 
x1 = ln(..!l_) 
lpl-1 
where P1 ls the price of the underlying contract at the end of the 1th time interval 
P/P1.1 ls sometimes referred to as the price relative. 
As an example, consider the volatility of the price changes in Agure 5-1. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

444 ApptndfxB 
Under1yfng DevfatJon Deviation 
Week Price ln(P1/Pr I) Mean from Mean Squared 
0 I 01.35 
I I 02.26 +.008939 .007771 .000060 
2 99.07 -.031692 -.032859 .001080 
3 I 00.39 +.013236 t--.012069 .000146 
4 100.76 +.003679 IQ .002512 .000006 -103.59 +.027699 -.026532 .000704 5 0 0 
6 99.26 -.042698 + -.043865 .001924 
7 98.28 -.009922 -.011089 .000123 
8 99.98 +.017150 .015982 .000255 
9 103.78 +.037303 .036136 .001306 
10 102.54 -.012020 -.013188 .000174 
+.011674 .005778 
We first calulate the standard deviation of the logarithmic price changes: 
standard deviation = ✓(.005778/9) 
= ✓.000642 
= .025338 
We then calculate the annual volatility by multiplying the standard deviation by the 
square root of the time Interval between price changes. Since we looked at price changes 
every week, the time Interval Is 365/7: 
annualized volatility = .025338 x ✓(365/7) 
= .025338 X ✓52.14 
= .025338 X 7.22 
= .1829 (18.29%) 
We can calculate the volatility of a stock, such as In Figure 5-2, in the same way 
except that we must remember that the volatlllty Is based on the forward price. This 
requires two modifications. Over any Interval of time, In order to maintain a theoreti· 
cally arnitrage-free market, the stock price Is expected to increase by the carrying costs 
on the stock over that period. If we record stock price changes at weekly Intervals, the 
stock price Is expected to rise by r/52, where r Is the annualized, risk-free Interest rate. 
The price changes are therefore expressed as: 
X -In(. pl ) 
I -l (1 +r/52)P 1-1 
When the stock gives up Its dividend, this does not really cause a change in the stock 
price. We therefore Include the dividend, D, In the price of the stock when calculating 
price change over the period when the stock goes ex-dividend: 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The MathemRffcs of Option Prfcf ng 44$ 
x, ~ In (o+r:;~~P,_,) J 
Over short periods of time, or in a low-Interest-rate environment, the Impact of 
interest rates on the forward price Is small, and can usually be Ignored when calculatlng 
historical stock price volatlllty. 
The Extreme Value Method8 
When rellable settlement prices are unavallable, the extreme value method Is an 
acceptable alternative method of calculating historical volatility. The method uses high 
and low prices during a period, and each data point, Xi, Is equal to: 
X1 = .601 • ln(H/1,) 
where Ht = the highest price over time period t 
~ = the lowest price over time period t 
The volatility is the standard deviation of all ~' annualized by multiplying by the 
square root of the number of time periods, t, in a year. If t is a daily interval, we must 
Figure B-4: Using a Newto~aphson Search to Find the Implied Volatility 
Implied 
Volatility theoretical value 
at second guess I 
I theoretica l value 
at first guess 
I 1/ 
/ 1 
//' ,· vega at 
vega at 
second guess first guess 
Volatility ------- ------ ~ 
8. Parkinson, Michael, "The Extreme Value Method for Estimating the Variance of the Rate of Return•, 
Jourfl,3./ of Bustness, Vol. 53, No.1, 1980, pages 61-65. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Append/Jc 8 
multiply by the square root of the number of trading days In a year (approximately 253); 
If t Is a weekly Interval, we must mulUply by the square root of the number of tradfng 
weeks In a year (approximately 52). 
Calculation of Implied Volatility 
While It Is not possible to Invert the Black-Scholes Model to arrive at an Jmplied vo1atllity 
from a known option price, a Newton-Raphson search can be used to converge on the 
implied volatility quite quickly. We first make a guess as to the option's implied 
volatility, and then use the option's vega (sensitivity to a change in volatility) to come 
progressively closer to the true Implied volatility. This method is illustrated in Figure 
B-4. 
Because an option's vega is relatively linear, the method converges very quickly, 
usually with no more than four iterations, even with a poor first guess. The iterative 
process is: 
where p = the option's price 
Xi = the volatility 
Yi = the option's theoretical value at volatility xi 
v1 = the option's vega at volatility x1 
We choose a desired degree of accuracy, E, and continue with the process until ly1 -pl < 
E, at which point x1 is the desired implied volatility. 
THE EXPONENTIAL AND NATURAL 
LOGARITHM FUNCTIONS 
Since the natural logarithm (ln(x}) and exponential function (e1} play such an important 
role in most theoretical pricing models, a brief discussion of their use may be worth­
while. 
Suppose r = an annual interest rate, 
expressed as a decimal fraction 
I = the amount of an investment 
t = the time period over which the investment is made, 
expressed in years 
When r is continuously compounded, the value, V, of I at the end of the time 
period, t, is given by: 
V=er1.1 
When r is continuously compounded, the initial investment, I, required to yield V 
at the end of the time period is given by: 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Mathemsttcs of Option Pricing 447 
I = e·rt • V 
l ls referred to as the present value of V, I.e., V discounted by Its carrying costs. 
Toe yield, y, resulting from the continuous compounding of the Interest rate, r, over 
the time period is given by: 
The annualized yield is y/t. 
Example: If r=10% (.10), the value of a $2,000 Investment In three months 
(t=.25) if interest is compounded continuously wlll be: 
V = ert • $2,000 = e-10·•25 • $2,000 
= e,025 • $2,000 = 1.0253 . $2,000 = $2,050.63 
Example: If r=6% (.06) and is compounded continuously, the amount of money 
one would need to invest to have $5,000 after eight months (t=.667) would be: 
I = e~ • $5,000 = e·06••667 • $5,000 
= e--04 • $5,000 = .9608. $5,000 = $4,803.95 
Example: If r=15% (.15) and Is compounded continuously, the total yield on a 
six-month (t=.5) investment will be: 
y = ert-1 = e·15••5 -1 = e-075 -1 = .0779 (7.79%) 
The total annualized yield is: 
y/t = .0779/.5 = .1558 (15.58%) 
If I ls the amount initially Invested, the continuously compounded rate of return, 
rt, needed to yield V over some period of time, t, ls given by: 
rt= ln(V/1) 
If v ts greater than I, the resulting rate of return will be a positive number. If V is less 
than I, the resulting rate of return will be a negative number. The annualized rate of 
return ls: 
r = r/t = ln(V/1)/t 
Example: Assuming continuous compounding, the annual rate of return required 
for an initial investment of $3,000 to yield $3,200 in nine months (t=.75) ls: 
r = In(3,200/3,OOO)/.75 = ln(l .0667)/.75 
= .0645/.75 = .0861(8.61%) 
Note that the exponential and logarithmic functions are Inverses: 
In( e') = eln(x) = X 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

448 ApptMlx8 
Because volatlllty Is also a rate or return, and Is assumed to be contJnuousty 
compounded, the exponenUal and logarithmic functlons can be used to calculate 
expected price changes of an underlying contract. 
Example: Suppose a certain futures contract Is trading at a price, P, of 50 and has 
an annual volaUllty, v, of 12%. A one standard devlatlon upward price change Is 
eV, p: e,12 • 50: 1.)275, 50: 56,37 
A one standard devlatlon downward price change Is 
e-v. P = e··12 • 50 = .8869 • 50 = 44.35 
Since we know that one standard deviation takes In about 68 percent of all outcomes, 
we know that If the volatility figure of 12% Is correct, there Is a 68 percent chance that 
one year from now the same futures contract wlll be tradlng between 44.35 and 56.37. 
What about a two standard deviation price change? If the move Is upward, we 
calculate: 
e·12•2• 50 = e·24• 50 = 1.2712 , 50 = 63.56 
If the move Is downward, we calculate: 
e··12•2, SO= e-.24• 50 = .7866. 50 = 39.33 
Since we know that two standard deviations takes In about 95% of all outcomes, we 
know that lf the volatlllty figure of 12% Is correct, there Is a 95% chance that one year 
from now the same futures contract will be trading between 63.56 and 39 .33. 
For time periods other than one year we must also take Into consideration the 
square root relatlonshlp between time and volatility. If a one standard deviation prtce 
change over a pet1od Is given by v, then a one standard devlatlon price change over a 
pertod which ls twice as long Is v "'2. Similarly, a one standard deviation price change 
over a period only half as long Is v ../3'. The generalized rule Is: 
volatility (standard deviation) over the period t = v • ~t 
where v Is the annualized volatility and t Is the time pertod In years. This enables us to 
express a move of n standard deviations over t as either: 
en•v•'«. P (an upward move) 
or 
e-n•di • P (a downward move) 
where P ls the current price of the contract. 
Example: With an underlying contract at 84.00 and an annual volatility of 16%, 
a one and two standard deviation price change over a three-month period It= .25) ls: 
e·16l°25 • 84.00 = e·16••5 • 84.00 = e-08 • 84.00 
= 1.0833 • 84.00 = 91.00 (up 1 standard deviation) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

'{he Mathef11JltiCS of Option Pricing 44() 
e2-.16i"2s . 84.00 = e2••16••5 • 84.00 = e-16. 84.00 
= 1.1735 • 84.00 = 98.57 (up 2 standard deVlatlons) 
e-.t6f.25 . 84.00 = e-·16••5 • 84.00 = e--08• 84.00 
= .9231 • 84.00 = 77.54 (down 1 standard deVlatlon) 
e-2-.16i"2s. 84.00 = e-2••16••5 • 84.00 = e--16. 84.00 
= .8521 • 84.00 = 71.58 (down 2 standard deVlatlons) 
Given a volatility and time period we can always calculate the number of standard 
deviations required to reach an outcome. If we have a table of standard deVlatlons and 
their associated probabilities, we can then find the probablllty associated with that 
outcome. In the case of options, we might often be interested In the probability of an option 
with a certain exercise price being In-the-money at expiration. The movement, In 
standard deviations, required for an underlying contract with price, P, to go through an 
exercise price, E, at expiration ls given by: 
number of standard deviations = ln(~) 
V t 
Example: If conditions are the same as In the last example (v=.16, P=84.00), the 
movement, in standard deviations, required for a 95 call to finish In-the-money three 
months from now is: 
ln(95/84)/(.16 •~25) = In(l.1310)/.08 = .1231/.08 = +l.5383 st. devs. 
Checking a table of standard deviations, we find that there Is approximately a 6.2% 
chance, or about one chance in 16, of an upward move of 1.5383 standard deviations. 
In the case of a stock, a slight modification Is necessary because the volatility 
represents price movement away from the forward price. If P ls the current stock price, 
t ls the time period, r ls the risk-free Interest rate, and D ls the amount of dividends 
expected over the period, the forward price of the stock, PP ls: 
Pr= P • ert-D 
Example: Suppose Interest rates are at 8%. If a certain non-dividend paying stock 
is trading at 38 and has an annual volatility of 27%, the movement, In standard 
deviations, needed for a 35 put to finish In-the-money six months (t=.5) from now ls: 
ln[35/(38-e·08••5)/(.27•~5) = ln(35/39.55)/. l 91 
= -.122/ .191 = -.64 standard deviations 
Checking a table of standard deviations, we find that there is approximately a 26% 
chance, or about one chance in four, of a downward move of .64 standard deviations. 