Volatility 
What ls volatility and why ls It so Important to an option trader? The option trader, Uke 
a trader In the underlying Instrument, Is Interested In the direction of the market But 
unllke the trader In the underlying, an option trader Is also extremely sensitive to the 
speed of the market If the market for an underlying contract falls to move at a sufficient 
speed options on that contract will have less value because of the reduced llkellhood 
of the' market going through an option's exercise price. In a sense, volatlllty ls a measure 
of the speed of the market. Markets which move slowly are low-volatlllty markets; 
markets which move quickly are high-volatility markets. 
One might guess intuitively that some markets are more volatile than others. 
Between 1980 and 1982, the price of gold moved from $300 per ounce to $800 per 
ounce, more than doubling Its price. Yet few traders would predict that the S&P 500 
Index might more than double In a similar period. A commodity trader knows that 
precious metals are generally more volatile than Interest rate Instruments. In the same 
way, a stock trader knows that high-technology stocks tend to be more volatile than 
utility stocks. 
If we knew whether a market was likely to be relatively volatile, or relatively quiet, 
and could convey this information to a theoretical pricing model, any evaluation of 
options on that market would be more accurate than lf we simply Ignored volatlllty. 
Since option models are based on mathematical formulae, we will need some method 
of quantifying this volatility component so that we can feed it Into the model ln 
numerical form. 
RANDOM WALKS AND NORMAL DISTRIBUTIONS 
Consider for a moment the pinball maze pictured in Figure 4-1. When a ball ls dropped 
Into the maze at the top lt moves downward, pulled by gravity, through a series of nails. 
When the ball encounters each nail there ls a 50% chance the ball wlll move to the right, 
and a 50% chance It will move left. The ball then falls down to a new level where It 
encounters another nail. Finally, at the bottom of the maze the ball falls into one of the 
troughs. 
The path the ball follows as lt moves downward through the maze of nails ls known 
as a random walk. Once the ball enters the maze nothing can be done to artlflclally alter 
its course, nor can one predict ahead of time the path the ball will take through the 
maze. 
51 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S2 
Figure 4-1: Random Walk 
I 
If enough balls are dropped into the maze, we might begin to get a distribution of 
balls slmllar to that In FJgure 4-2. Most of the balls tend to congregate near the center 
of the maze, with a decreasing number of balls ending up In troughs further away from 
the center. The distribution which results from dropping many balls Into our maze Is 
referred to as a normal, or bell-shaped, dlstrlbutton. 
If we were to drop an Infinite number of balls into the maze we might approximate 
the distribution with a normal, or bell-shaped, curve such as the one overlaid on the 
distribution In Figure 4·2. Such a curve Is symmetrical (if we flipped It from right to left 
it would look the same), it has Its peak in the center, and its tails always flare down and 
away from the center. 
Normal distribution curves are used to describe the likely outcomes of random 
events. For example, the curve In Figure 4-2 might also represent the results of flipping 
a coin 15 times. Each outcome, or trough, would represent the number of heads which 0
1c5curred after each 15 flips. An outcome In trough zero would represent zero heads and 
tails; an outcome In trough 15 Id 
we would be surprised to fl! wou represent 15 heads and zero talls. Of course, 
Pa coin 15 tlmes and get all heads or all talls. Assuming the 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Volatility 53 
figure 4-2: Normal Distribution 
. . . . . . . . . .... . . . . . . .. 
♦ • • • • • 
♦ • • • • • • 
. . . . . . . . 
coin is perfectly balanced; some outcome in between, perhaps 8 heads and 7 tails, or 9 
heads and 6 tails, seems more likely. 
Suppose we change our maze slightly by closing off a row of nails so that each time 
a ball encounters a nan and goes either left or right, It must drop down two levels before 
It encounters another nail. If we drop enough balls Into the maze we may end up with 
a distribution represented by the curve in Figure 4-3. Since the sideways movement of 
the balls ls restricted, the curve wlll have a higher peak and narrower tails than the curve 
In Figure 4-2. In spite of Its altered shape, this curve stlll represents a normal distribution, 
although one with slightly different characteristics. 
Finally, we might block off some of the spaces between nails so that each time a 
ball drops down a level It must move two nails left or right before It can drop down to 
a new level. Again, If we drop enough balls into the maze we may get a distribution 
which resembles the curve in Figure 4-4. This curve, while still a normal distribution 
curve, wlll have a much lower peak and its tails will spread out much more quickly than 
the curves in either Figure 4-2 or 4-3. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54 
Figure 4-3: Low Volatility Distribution 
V .1 
r l 
( { ( 
, r r r 
11.rrrr 
11-1[((( 
I 
1/ \ 
/ 
I 
\ 
Suppose we now think of the ball's sideways movement as the up and down prtce 
movement of an underlying contract, and the ball's downward movement as the 
passage of time. If we assume that each day the underlying contract can move up or 
down $1, the price distribution after 15 days might be represented by the curve In Figure 
4·2. If we assume the price can move up or down $1 every two days, the prtce 
dlstrlbutlon after 15 days might be represented by the curve ln Figure 43. And lf we 
assume that each day the price can move up or down $2, the price distribution might 
be represented by the curve In Figure 4-4. 
With the underlytng contract presently at $100 and 15 days to expiration, how 
might we evaluate a $105 call? One way ls to asswne that prices follow a random walk 
through time and that one of the curves In Figures 4-2, 4-3, or 44 represents the likely 
distribution after 15 days. The comparative value of the $105 call under these three 
scenarios ls shown In Figure 4-5. If we assume a distribution similar to Figure 4-3, we 
can see that the underlying contract has very little chance of reaching $105. Conse­
quently, the value of the $105 call will be low. If we assume a distribution slmllar to 
FJgure 4·2, there ls an increased probablllty of the underlying reaching $105, and this 
wm Increase the value of the $105 call. Finally, lf we assume a distribution similar to 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

figure 4-4: High Volatility Distribution 
. a: . 
. :_-..-. . -• ._ ---:-_ .... -_ 
. :_ -:._ -_ -.~ - -. :=-:---. :_-_-:__-_ --~ ---. ~---- --------..-·---· -- --- •• -----·-----·-·--... - -----. ,__,. -. ____ __,. __ .,___ __ ---
-V ...... 1-... r--,... v I'--V I'-, V ['. v I'-, V I'--r-ss 
Figure 4-4, there ls a very real likelihood that the $105 call could flnlsh ln·the-money. 
As a result, the value of the option Will increase dramatically. 
If we assume only that the price movement of an underlying contract follows a 
random walk, and nothing about the likely direction of movement, the curves ln Figures 
4-2, 4·3, and 4·4 might represent possible prtce dlstrlbutlons In a moderate-volatlllty, 
low-volatility, and hlgh·volatlllty market, respectively. In a low-volatlllty market, prtce 
movement ls severely restricted, and consequently options will command relatively low 
premiums. In a high-volatility market the chances for extreme price movement Is greatly 
Increased, and options Will command high premlums. 
Since the different prtce dlstrtbutions in Figure 4-5 are symmetrtcal, It may seem 
that Increased volatility should have no effect on an option's value. After all, Increased 
volatlllty may Increase the likelihood of large upward movement, but thls should be 
offset by the equally greater likelihood of large downward movement Here, however, 
there ls an Important distinction between an option position and an underlying position. 
Unlike an underlying contract, an option's potential loss ls limited. No matter how far 
the market drops, a call option can only go to zero. In our example, whether the market 
flnlshes at $80 or $104 at expiration, the $105 call will be worthless. However, if we 
buy the underlying contract at $100, there ls a tremendous difference between the 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56 
Figure 4-5: Price Distribution at Expiration 
moderate volatility 
distribution ~ 
I 
high volatility ; 
distribution \ / 
/• 
✓/'l ___ .,,,.,,,/ present price 
of underlying 
,.,--exercise 
price 
...... ...... --.... ------
market finishing at $80 or $104. With an underlying contract all outcomes an 
Important; with an option, only those outcomes which result In the option fln!Shfr4 
ln•the-money are Important. In Figure 4-5, we are only concerned wJth price outcoma 
to the right of the exercise price. Everything else Is zero. 
This leads to an Important distinction between evaluation of an underlying contraa 
and evaluation of an option. If we assume that prtces are distributed along a norma 
dtsttibution cUJVe, the value of an underlying contract depends on where the peak of tt£ 
curve Is located, while the value of an option depends on how fast the curve spreads out 
MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION 
Suppose we want to use the concept of prtce movement based on nonnal distribution 
cmves In a theoretical pricing model. To do this we need a method of describing the 
characteristics of the curve to the model. Since the model Is based on mathematics, we 
need to describe the curve In numertcal tenns so that we can feed the numbers Into the 
model. 
Fonunately, a normal distribution curve can be fully described with two numbers, 
the mean and the standard deviation. If we know that a distribution Is nonnal and we 
also know lhese two numbers, then we know all the charactelistlcs of the dls~butlon. 
the 5~~~:~~a~l:~;~0can Interpret the mean as the location of the peak of the curve, and 
n as a measure of how fast the curve sp~eads out. Curves which 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Volittllty 57 
spread out very quickly, such as Agure 441 have a high standard devtatlon; curves 
which spread out very slowly, such as Figure 4·3, have a low standard devlatlon. 
While the mean ls nothing more than the average outcome, and therefore a famfllar 
concept for many traders, the standard deVlatlon may not be quite so famlllar. Indeed, 
one need not know how either of these numbers are calculated In order to successfully 
trade optlons. (For those who are Interested, a more detailed discussion appears In 
AppendlX B.) What ls Important to an optlon trader Is the Interpretation of these 
numbers, In partlcular what a mean and standard devtatlon suggest In terms of likely 
price movement. 
Let's go back to Figure 4·2 and consider the troughs numbered o to 15 at the 
bottom. We suggested that these numbers might represent the number of heads 
resulting from 15 flips of a coin. Alternatively, they might also represent the number of 
times a ball went right at each nail as It dropped down through the maze. Toe first 
crough Is assigned zero since any ball which ends there must have gone left at every 
nail. The last trough Is assigned 15 since any ball which ends there must have gone right 
at every nail. 
Suppose we are told that the mean and standard devlatlon In Flgure 4·2 are 7.50 
and 3.00, respectively. What does this tell us about the distribution? (The actual mean 
and standard deviation of 7.51 and 2.99 are calculated in Appendix B. Here, for 
simplicity, we will round to 7.50 and 3.00.) The mean tells us the average outcome. If 
we add up all the outcomes and divide by the number of occurrences, the result wlll be 
7.50. In terms of the troughs, the average result will fall half-way between troughs 7 
and 8. (Of course this Is not an actual posslblllty. However, we noted in Chapter 3 that 
the average outcome does not have to be an actual possibility for any one outcome.) 
The standard deviation not only descrtbes how fast the distribution spreads out; it 
also tells us something about the llkellhood of a ball ending up In a speclflc trough or 
group of troughs. In paltlcular, the standard deviation tells us the probablllty of a ball 
ending up in a trough which ls a speclfled distance from the mean. For example, we 
may want to know the likelihood of a ball falling down through the maze and ending 
up in a trough lower than S or higher than 10. We can answer the question by asking 
how many standard deviations the ball must move away from the mean, and then 
determine the probabillty associated with that number of standard deviations. 
The exact probabillty associated with any specific number of standard deviations 
can be found In mathematical tables ln most books on statistics. Alternatively, such 
probabllitles can be closely approximated using an appropriate formula (see Appendix 
BJ. For option traders the following approximations will be useful: 
+ 1 standard deviation takes ln approximately 68.3% (about¼) of all occurrences 
±2 standard deviations takes in approximately 95.4% (about 19/io} of all occur­
rences 
±3 standard deviations takes in approximately 99.7% (about 369f.370) of all occur· 
rences 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

58 
Note that each number of standard devtatlons ls preceded by a plus or m1nt1f 
Because nonnal dtstrtbutlons are symmetrical, the likelihood or up movement and 
movement Is Identical. 
Now let's try to answer our question about the likelihood of getdng a baD 
trough lower than S or hlgher than l 0. We can designate the divider becween ~ 
7 and 8 as the mean or 1112. If the standard deviation Is 3, what troughs are w1tnll 
standard deviation or the mean? One standard deviation from the mean 1s 71/i t J 
41"2 to 1011i. Again Interpreting 11i as the divider between troughs, we can Stt 
troughs 5 through 10 fall wlthln one standard deVlatlon of the mean. We knOW that 
standard deviation takes In about 2/3 of all occurrences, so we can conclude that ... 
of every three balls we drop Into the maze, two should end up In troughs 5 thJ'OUfJ\ ~ 
What Is left over, one out of every three balls, will end up In one of the remb 
troughs, 0-4 and 11 • 15. Hence, the answer to our original questlon about the llkelito: 
of getting a ball In a trough lower than 5 or hlgher than 10 Is about 1 chance In 3, 
about33%. (The exact answer Is 100%-68.3%, or 31.7%.) This Is shown In Agure4{ 
Let's uy another calculatlon, but this time we can think of the problem as a~ 
Suppose someone offers us 30 to 1 odds that we can't drop a ball Into the maze mi 
lt specifically In troughs 14 or 15. Is this bet worth making? One characterts t1c 
standard deviations Is that they are addltlve. In our example, If one standard devta 
ts 3, then two standard deviations are 6. Two standard deviations from the mem 
therefore 7112 ± 6 = 1 ½ to 1311i. We can see In Agure 4·6 that troughs 14 and I 5 
outside two standard deviations. Since the probablllty of getting a result within ~ 
standard deviations Is approximately 19 out of 20, the probability of getting a 
beyond two standard deviations Is 1 chance In 20. Therefore 30 to 1 odds may see 
very favorable. Recall, however, that beyond two standard devtatlons also indud~ 
troughs O and 1. Since nonnal distributions are symmetrical, the chances of getttng, 
ball specifically In troughs 14 or 15 must be half of 1 chance In 20, or about 1 chm:? 
In 40. At 30 to l odds the bet must be a bad one since the odds do not sufflcienti 
compensate us for the risk Involved. 
In Chapter 3 we said that one logical approach to option evaluation Is to assign, 
probablllty to an Infinite number of possible price outcomes for an underlying contra<t 
Then, If we multiply each possible price outcome by Its associated probablllty we a: 
use the results to calculate an option's theoretical value. The problem is in deallng m 
an Infinite number of price outcomes and probabllltles, since an infinite number ~ 
anything ls not easy to work with. Fortunately, the charactertstlcs of normal dlstrtoo­
tlons have been so closely studied that formulas have been developed which facilitate 
~::mtlputatlon of both the probabllltles associated with every point along a nortnil u on curve, as well as the area under rl 
that prtces of an underlytn lnstrum va ous portions of the curve. If we ass\JID! 
sent a unique set of tools Jth which ent are nonnally distributed, these fonnulas repre­
ls one of the reasons Black and Sch re can solve for an Option's theoretical value This 
part of their model. 0 es adopted the normal dlstrtbutlon assumptl~n ts 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ttlfl 59 
~ 1 atandard devtatton ea.a% {;l/3) 
11,11e&n 7. eo ~2 atandard devtaflon• ge_-4-,c. (1 /2tl) 
suand•rd Deviatio n -3.00 ~3 etandard devtaflon• _ gg_r,f, (399/3'70} 
9f5,C. 
1◄ 68% I 
f I I I I I I i ! l I I I • ! I ! I I I I I I I I I I 
I I l I i 
; I ! I 
! j i I i I I I 
\ I ! 
i I i : ! I I I i ~ 
l I I I i I i ! 
i : ! 
f i : I l 
I I \ i 
f I ! 
i i 
I I j I f i i \ 
I I I I I i 
i i 
i i i 
\ l 
t I I 
i i i I 
\ I I 
0 
1 I +1 +2 
-2 -1 standard standard 
stanctard standard mean deviation c:teVlatiOOS 
deviation 7.50 10.50 13.!50 
deviations 
1.50 4.50 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

60 
UNDERLYING PRICE AS THE MEAN OF A DISTRIBI.JT1~ 
Now that we have decided to describe prices In terms of a normal dlstribution, tm, 
we feed this dlstributlon Into a theoretical pricing model? Since all normal dJs~ 
can be described by a mean and the standard dev1at1on, in some way we must feed 
two numbers Into our pricing model. 
When we enter the present prtce of an underlying Instrument we are ac 
entering the mean of a normal dlstrtbutlon cuive. An lmponanc assumptJon tn • 
Black-Scholes Model ls that, in the long run, a trade in the underlying 1nscrurnent 
Just break even. It wtll neither make money nor lose money. Given thJs assumptio n,. 
mean of the normal dlstrtbutlon cuive assumed In the model must be the prtce at 
a trade In the underlying instrument, either a purchase or a sale, would Just break ~ 
What Is that price? The answer depends on the type of underlying Instrument. 
Suppose a trader purchases a futures contract at 100 and holds the posJtion tor thrct 
months. Where does the price of the futures contract have to be at the end of ~ 
months for the trader to break even? Since futures contracts entaJI no carrying COSS, 
nor do they pay dividends, the break even price three months from now fs exactly ttt 
original trade price of 100. 
Now suppose that a trader purchases a $100 stock and holds It for three moml:a. 
Where does the stock price have to be at the end of the holding period for the trader 
break even? Since the purchase of stock requJres Immediate payment, the break eves 
price will have to Include the cost of carrying a $100 debit for three months. If Interei 
rates are 8% annually the carrying cost on $100 for three months Js 3/J 2 x 8% x $100 
= $2. Therefore, the stock price must be $102 at the end of three months for the trade 
to break even. If the stock will pay a dividend of $I during the holding period, then the 
stock price need only be $101 for the trade to break even. 
Note that thls Js exactly how we calculated the forward prtce of a contract in 
Chapter 3. And Indeed this Is exactly the type of calculation bullt Into the various forms 
of the Black-Scholes ModeJ. When we enter an underlying price Into the Black-Scholes 
model, based on the type of underlying Instrument, Interest rates, and dividends, the 
model calculates the forward prtce of the underlying Instrument at expiration and makes 
this price the mean of a nonnal distribution cUJve. 
VOLATILITY AS A STANDARD DEVIATION 
In addition to the mean, we also need a standard deviation to fully describe a nonnal 
dlstrlbutlon cuive. This ls entered In the form of a volatlllty. With some slight modlflca­
tlons, which we w1II discuss shortly, we can define the volatility number associated with 
an underlying Instrument as a one standard deviation price change, In percent, at the 
end of a one-year period. 
For example, suppose that an underlying futures contract Is currently trading at I 00 
and has a volatlllty of 20%. Since this represents a one standard deViatlon price change 
one year from now we expect the same futures contract to be trading between 80 and 
I 20 ( I 00 ± 20%) approximately 68% of the time, between 60 and 140 ( 100 ± (2 x 20%)) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VoWlllty 6/ 
approximately 95% of the time, and between 40 and 160 (100 ± (3 x 20%)) approx1• 
mately 99.7% of the tlme. 
If the underlying contract ls a stock currently trading at S 100, then the 20% 
volatility will have to be based on the forward prtce of the stock at the end of one year. 
If interest rates are 8% and the stock pays no dividends, the one-year forward prtce wtII 
be $108. Now a one standard devtatlon price change ls 20% x $108 = $21.60. So one 
year from now we would expect the same stock to be trading between $86.40 and 
$129.60 ($108 ± $21.60) approximately 68% of the time, between $64.80 and 
$151 .30 ($108 ± (2 x $21.60)) approximately 95% of the time, and between $4310 
and $172.90 ($108 ± (3 x $21.60)) approximately 99.7% of the time. 
Suppose we come back at the end of one year and find our futures contract, which 
we thought had a volatility of 20%, trading at 35. Does this mean our volatlllty of 20% 
was wrong? A price change of more than three standard deviations may be unlikely, but 
one shouldn't confuse unlikely and Impossible. Alpplng a perfectly balanced coin 15 
times may result In 15 heads, even though the odds against lt are more than 32,000 to 
1. If 20% was the right volatility, the odds of the futures prtce going from 100 to 35 one 
year later Is more than 1,500 to 1. But one chance In 1,500 Is not Impossible, and 
perhaps this was the one time In 1,500 when the price would Indeed end up at 35. Of 
course, It is also possible that we had the wrong volatility. But we wouldn't know this 
without looklng at price changes of the futures contract over many years so that we have 
a representative prtce distribution. 
LOGNORMAL DISTRIBUTIONS 
Is it reasonable to assume that the prices of an underlying instrument are normally 
distributed? Beyond the question of the exact distribution of prices In the real world, 
the nonnal distribution assumption has one sertous flaw. A normal distribution curve Is 
symmetrical. Under a nonnal dlstrlbutlon assumption, for every possible upward move 
in the price of an underlying Instrument there must be the posslblllty of a downward 
move of equal magnitude. If we allow for the posslbllity of a $50 instrument rtslng $75 
to $125, we must also allow for the posslblllty of the Instrument dropping $7 5 to a price 
of-$25. Since it is impossible for traditional stocks and commodities to take on negative 
prices, the nonnal distribution assumption ls clearly flawed. What can we do about this? 
Up to now we have defined volatility In terms of the percent changes in the price 
of an underlying instrument. In this sense an Interest rate and volatility are similar in 
that they both represent a rate of return. The primary difference between Interest and 
volatility is that interest generally accrues at a positive rate, while volatility represents a 
combination of positive and negative rates of return. If one Invests money at a fixed 
interest rate, the value of the principal will always 'iJOW. But if one invests In an 
underlying instrument with a volatility other than zero, the instrument may go either 
up or down In price. Volatlllty, which Is a standard deviation, says nothing about the 
direction of movement. 
Since volatility represents a rate of return, an Important consideration ls the manner 
In which the rate of return ts calculated. For example, suppose we were to Invest $1,000 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A an ~nnu&l tnt r t tate of 12%. How much would we have at rhi, d r 
nd on how the 12% Interest on our Investment is paid rrJ 
Value after 
of Payment One Year Tota1 Yfeld 
12 one a y ar $ 1 , 120. 00 12 % 
twtc a r ar $I, 123.60 l 2.36% 
vel)' three months $1,125.51 12.55% 
1 % eve!)' month $I, 126.83 12.68% 
12%/52 eveiy week $1,127.34 J 2.73% 
12%/365eveiyd ay $1,127.47 12.75% 
l2% compounded continuously $1,127.50 12.75% 
As interest ts paid more often, even though It ts paid at the same rate of 12% pe 
ear the total yteld on the investment increases. The yield is greatest when interest is 
~id' continuously. In this case it Is just as if interest were paid at every possible moment 
in time. 
AithOugh less common, we can do the same type of calculation using a negative 
interest rate. f,or example, suppose we were to lose 12 percent annually on our $1,000 
investment (interest rate = -12% ). How much would we have at the end of a year? The 
answer depends on the frequency at which our losses accrue. 
Value after 
Rate of Loss One Year Total Yield 
-12% once a year $880.00 -12% 
--6% twice a year $883.60 -11.64% 
-3% every three months $885.29 -11.47% 
-1% every month $886.38 -11.36% 
-12%/52 every week $886.80 -11.32% 
-12%/365 everyday $886.90 -11.31% 
-12% compounded continuously $886.92 -11.31% 
In the case of a negative interest rate, as losses are compounded more frequently 
even though at the same rate of-12% per year, the loss becomes smaller, and so does 
the negative yield. 
In the same way that interest can be compounded at different intervals, volatility 
can also be compounded at different intervals. For purposes of theoretical pricing of 
options, volatility is assumed to compound continuously, just as if the price changes in 
the underlying Instrument, either up or down, were tak!ng place continuous ly but at an 
annual rate corresponding to the volatility number associated with the underlying 
Instrument. 
What would happen If at every moment In time the price of an underlying could 
go up or down a given percent, and that these up and down movements were normally 
distributed? When prtce changes are assumed to be nonnally distributed, the continu-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Volltutty 63 
ous compounding of these price changes will cause the prices at maturity to be 
/ognormal/y distributed. Such a distribution Is skewed toward the upside because 
upside prices resulting from a positive rate of return wm be greater, In absolute terms, 
man downside prices resulting from a negative rate of return (Agure 4 7). In our Interest 
rate example, a continuously compounded rate of return of + 12% ytelds a profit of 
$127 .50 after one year, while a contln uously compounded rate of return of -12 % yields 
a loss of only $113.08. If the 12% were a volatlllty, then a one standard devtaUon 
upward price change at the end of one year would be +$127.50, while a one standard 
deviation downward price change would be -$113.08. Even though the rate of return 
was a constant 12%, the continuous compoundlngof the 12% yielded different upward 
and downward moves. 
The Black-Scholes Model ls a continuous time model. It assumes that the volatlllty 
of an underlying Instrument ls constant over the life of the optJon, but that this volatlllty 
ls continuously compounded . These two assumptions mean that the possible prtces of 
the underlying instrument at expiration of the option are lognonnally distributed. It also 
explains why options with higher exercise prices carry more value than options with 
lower exercise prices, where both exercise prices appear to be an identical amount away 
from the price of the underlying instrument For example, suppose a certain underlying 
contract ls trading at exactly 100. H there are no Interest considerations and we assume 
Figure 4-7: Lognorrnal Distribution 
o 12345 e 7 8 g 10 11 12 13 1' 15 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chlp(tr,( 
A nom1~l d1Stt1button of po lbl prices, then the 110 call and the 90 put, both b~lr,1 1 our of.th mon y, ought to have Identical theoretical values. But under t; 
lo n rmel ~ssumpuon tn the Black·Scholes Model, the 110 call will alway ha1/~ 
reater valu than the QO put. Jn absolute terms, the lognormal dlstrlbuUon assump , , 
8now for greater upside price movement than downside price movement. Con~ 
qu ntly, the 1 1 o call will have a greater possibility of price appreciation than the rx, 
put. I 
Finally, the lognormal assumption built Into the Black-Scholes Model overcom~ 
the logical problem we Initially posed. If we were to allow for the possibility of unnmtte 
upside price movement of an underlying Instrument, a normal distribution assumptlo 1 
would force us to allow for unlimited downside movement. This would requJre us r.o 
accept the possibility of negative prices for the underlying Instrument, clearly no a 
possibility for most optlonable Instruments. A lognormal distribution, however, doe; 
allow for open ended upside prices (the logarithm of +oo ls +oo), while bOunding 
downside prtces by zero (the logarithm of -oo Is zero). This Is a more reallstlc repre­
sentation of how prtces are actually distributed In the real world. 
A more complete discussion of logarithmic price changes and probabilitY calcula­
tions can be found In Appendix B. 
we can now summarize the most Important assumptions governing prtce move­
ment in the Black·Scholes Model: 
1. Changes in the price of an underlying Instrument are random and cannot be 
artificially manipulated, nor is it possible to predict beforehand the direction 
in which prices will move. 
2. The percent changes in the price of an underlying instrument are normally 
distributed. 
3. Because the percent changes in the price of the underlying instrument are 
assumed to be continuously compounded, the prices of the underlying instru­
ment at expiration will be lognormally distributed. 
4. The mean of the lognormal dlstrtbutlon will be located at the forward price of 
the underlying contract. 
The first of these assumptions may meet with resistance from some traders. 
Technical analysts believe that by looking at past price activity it is possible to predict 
the future direction of prices. One can chart support and resistance points, double tops 
and bottoms, head and shoulders, and many similar formations which are believed to 
predict future price trends. We leave debate on this question to others. The important 
point here is that the Black-Scholes Model makes the assumption that price changes are 
random and that their direction cannot be predicted. This does not mean that there is 
no predictive requirement in using the Black-Scholes Model. However, price prediction 
I . Of course, this Is only theory. There Is no law that says the price of the 90 put 1n the marketplace cannot 
be P,eater than the price of the 110 call. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

V IINlt 
, 111 fo u on th magnltud of the pr1ce change , rather than on th dlr c 10n of 
hanges. A we shall see later, there Is also good reason to question the third as ump on, 
that prices are lognormally distributed at expiration. This may be a reasonable assump­
tion for some markets, but a very poor assumption for other markets. Again, the 
important point here is for the trader who uses a theoretical pricing model to understand 
the assumptions on which the theoretical values are based. He can then make hJs-own 
decision, based on his knowledge of a particular market, as to whether these assump­
tions, and hence the theoretical values generated by the model, are llkely to be accurate. 
DAILY AND WEEKLY STANDARD DEVIATIONS 
As an annual standard deviation, we know what the volatlHty telJs us about the llkely 
prtce movement of a contract over a one-year period. However, this ls a period of time 
longer than the life of most listed options. We might want to know what a volatlllty tells 
us about price changes over a shorter pertod of time, for example over a month, or a 
week, or a day. 
An important characteristic of volatility is that it ls proportional to the square root 
of time. As a result of this, we can approximate a volatility over some period of time 
shorter than a year by dividing the annual volatility by the square root of the number of 
trading periods in a year. 
Suppose we are interested in a daily volatility. While It would take a logarithmic 
calculation to give us an exact daily volatility, if we Ignore the relatively minor effect of 
continuous compounding over such a short period of time, lt ls possible to make an 
estimate of dally volatility. First we must determine the number of daily trading periods 
in a year. That ls, if we look at prices at the end of every day, how many times a year 
can prices change? If we restrtct ourselves to exchange traded options, even though 
there are 365 days in a year, prices cannot really change on weekends or holidays. This 
leaves us with about 256 trading days durtng the year.2 Since the square root of 256 is 
16, to approximate a daily volatility we can divide the annual volatility by 16. 
Going back to our futures contract trading at 100 with a volatility of 20%, what ls 
a one standard deviation price change over a day's time? 20%/16 = 11/4%, so a one 
standard deviation daily price change is l 1/4% x 100 = 1.25. We expect to see a price 
change of 1.25 or less approximately two trading days out of every three, and a price 
change of 2.50 or less approximately 19 trading days out of every 20. Only one day in 
20 would we expect to see a price change of more than 2.50. 
We can do the same type of calculation for a weekly standard deviation. Now we 
must ask how many times per year prices can change If we look at prices once a week. 
Unlike trading days, we don't have "holiday" weeks, so we must make our calculations 
using all 52 trading weeks in a year. Dividing our annual volatlUty of 20% by the square 
root of 52, or approximately 7.2, we get 20%/7.2 = 2314. For our futures contract 
2. DependJng on holidays, the number of trading days Js usually somewhere between 250 and 255. We 
use 256 as a ~able approXimatlon since Its square root ts a whole number and therefore eEer to 
workwtth. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66 
trading at 100, we would expect to see a price change of 2.75 or Jess two weeu O!. ,, 
every three, a pr1ce change of 5.50 or less I 9 weeks out of every 20, and only one ;,,~ 
In twenty would we expect to see a price change of more than 5.50. 
Since we assume that the price of a stock wflJ appreciate by the carrytng C(W-.; 
may seem that we cannot use the same method (divide by 16 for daJJy VOlatJUcy, df'I~ 
by 7.2 forweeklyvolatlllty) to approxJmate expected movement In an underlyf:ng sr.ocl 
However, over a short period of time, the carrying cost component, llke the effect 'i 
continuous compounding of volat11Jty, wm be relatively small. Therefore we can ~ 
I the same method as a reasonable estimate ot dally and weekly volaWJty. r-or ~ 
suppose a stock Is trading at $45 per share and has an annual volatility of 28 % .. V/tm i 
an approximate one standard deviation price change over a day's time and over a week's 
time? 
For a dally volatility we calculate: 
28%/16 x $45 = 1.75% x $45 = S.79 
For a weekly volatility we calculate: 
28%/7.2 X $45 = 3.89% X $45 = $1.75 
We expect to see a price change of approximately 314 point or less two days out Of 
every three, 1 1/2 points or less 19 days out of every 20, and only one day In 20 wou~ 
we expect to see a price change ot more than I 1/2 points. On a weekly basis, we woufd 
expect to see a price change of 13/4 points or less two weeks out of every three, a pw 
change of 3 ½ points or less 19 weeks out ot every 20, and only one week 1n 20 would 
we expect to see a price change of more than 3 ½ points. 
We have used the phrase 11prtce change" In conjunction wtth our volarfilty 
estimates. Exactly what do we mean by this? Do we mean the high/low durfng some 
pertod? Do we mean open to close price changes? Or ls there another Interpretatio n? 
Whlle various methods have been suggested to estimate volatlllty, 3 the tradlttoncl 
method has been to calculate volatility based on settlement-to-settlement pnce changes. 
Using this approach, when we say a one standard deviation dally prtce change ls ¥.­
point, we mean a 3/4 point price change from one day's settlement price to the next 
day's settlement prtce. The high/low or open/close price change may have been either 
more or less than 3/4 point, but It ls the settlement-to-settlement price change on whlch 
we focus. 
3. See: 
Parkinson, Michael, "The Extreme Value Method of Estlmattng the Vadance of the Rate of Return,• 
Jourrul of IJJJstntss, 1980, vol 53, no. t, pp. 6 t ~4. 
Garman, Mark 8. and Klass, Michael J., "Oo the Estimation of Security Price VoJaWJUes from HJstodcal 
Data,• Joum,/ of Business, 1980, vol 53, no. 1, pp. 67-78. 
Beckers, Stan, "Variance of Security Price Returns Based on High, low, and Qostng Prices," Jounyf of 
Business, 1983, vol 56, no. 1, pp.97-112. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

. 
l J VoWtllty 61 
VOLATWTY AND OBSERVED PRICE CHANGES 
Why ls It Important for a trader to be able to estimate dally or weekly prtce changes from 
an annual volatility? Volatility ls the one Input Into a theoreUcal pricing model which 
cannot be directly observed. Yet many option strategies, If they are to be successful, 
require an accurate assessment of volaUllty. Therefore, an option trader needs some 
method or detennlnlng whether his expectations about volatility are Indeed being 
reallzed ln the marketplace. Unllke dlrecUonal strategies, whose success or failure can 
be Immediately observed from posted prices, there ls no posUng or volaUIIUes. A trader 
must determine for himself whether he Is using a reasonable volatlllty Input Into the 
theoretical pricing model. 
F-or example, suppose a certain underlying contract ls trading at 40 and a trader 1s 
using a 30% volatlllty for theoretical evaluation. A one standard deviation dally prtce 
change ls approximately 30%/16 x 40 = .75. Over five days of trading a trader notes 
the following five settlement-to-settlement price changes: 
+.43, -.06, -.61, +.50, -.28 
Are these five price changes consistent with a 30% volaUUty? 
The trader expects to see a price change of more than .75 (one standard devlatlon) 
about one day in three, or between one and two times over a five-day period. Yet durtng 
this five-day period he did not see a price change of this magnltude even once. What 
conduslons can be drawn from thls?4 One thing ts certain: these five price changes are 
not consistent with 30% volatlUty. The trader might explain the discrepancy In one of 
two ways. On the one hand, perhaps this was expected to be an abnormally quiet week 
(perhaps It was a hollday week); and next week when trading returns to normal the 
market wlll go right back to making moves which are more consistent with a 30% 
volatlllty. If the trader comes to this conclusion, perhaps he ought to continue to use a 
30% volatility for his calculations. On the other hand, perhaps there ts no apparent 
reason for the market belng less volatile than predicted by a 30% volatility. He may 
simply be using the wrong volatility. If the trader comes to this conclusion, perhaps he 
ought to consider using a new volatility Input which ts more consistent with the 
observed price changes. If he continues to use a 30% volatlllty in the face of prtce 
changes which are slgnlftcantly less than predicted by that number, he will be assigning 
the wrong probabllitles to the possible prtce outcomes for the underlying contract 
Consequently, he wlll generate incorrect theoretical values, defeating the purpose of 
using a theoretical pricing model in the first place. 
Exactly what volatlllty ts associated with the five price changes tn the foregolng 
example? Without some rather involved calculations It ts difficult to say. (The answer 
is actually 18.8%.) However, tr a trader has some ldea beforehand of what prtce chang~ 
he expects, he can eastly see that the changes over the five-day period are not conslSten 
With a 30% volatility. 
4. to draw a meaningful conclusion about 
Rve days Js admJttedly a very small sample from whl:d 
voJat11Jty. The method and reasonJn& however, are still • 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chapttt4 
Let's look at another example. Now the underlying contract Is trading at 3321.1, 
and a trader notes the following five dally price changes: 
-5, +21/2, +l, -7·1/4, -41/4 
Are. these price changes consistent with an 18% volatility? At 18% a one standard 
deviation price change Is approximately 18%/16 x 3321/2 = 33/4. Over five days we 
expect to see a prtce change of more than 33/4 between one and two times. Yet here we 
have a price change of more than 3¾ three days out of five. And once the prtce change 
was 73;4 (more than two standard deviations) which we expect to see only one day in 
twenty. Again, unless the trader believes that the five price changes occurred during an 
extraordinary week, then perhaps he ought to consider changing his volatility figure so 
that it Is more consistent with the observed price changes. 
A NOTE ON INTEREST RATE PRODUCTS 
Suppose Eurodollars are at 93.00 and we assume a volatility of 16 percent. We can apply 
the method previously described to calculate an approximate one standard deviation 
daily price change: 16%/16 x 93.00 = . 93. As any trader familiar with the Eurodollar 
market will attest, a dally price change of . 93 is wlldly unlikely. How can we account 
for this seemingly lllog!cal answer? One might conclude that we simply have the wrong 
volatility, and some lower number Is more accurate. In fact, the 16% volatility is not at 
all unusual for Eurodollars, so the explanation must lie elsewhere. 
Eurodollars, like many other Interest rate contracts (U.S. Treasury Bills, Short 
Sterling, Euromarks, Euroyen) are indexed from 100. This means that the interest rate 
associated with a Eurodollar contract Is 100 less the value of the contract It also means 
that, barring the unlikely advent of negative Interest rates, the contract cannot take on 
a value greater than 100. In this respect, 100 acts as a limiting value for Eurodollars in 
the same way that zero acts as a limiting value for traditional underlying contracts such 
as stocks and commodities. We can integrate this characteristic into our calculations by 
assuming that the value of a Eurodollar contract Is actually 100 less its listed price. If 
the listed price Is 93.00, for theoretical evaluation purposes we must use a value of 100 
-93.00, or 7.00, in our pricing model. If we define the value of the contract as 7 .00, a 
one standard deviation price change Is 16%/16 x 7.00 = .07. This is certainly a more 
realistic result than . 93. 
To be consistent, If we Index Eurodollar prices from 100 we must also index 
exercise prices from 100. Therefore, a 93.50 exercise price In our pricing model is really 
a 6.50 (100-93.50) exercise price. This also requires us to reverse the type of option, 
changing calls to puts and puts to calls. To see why, consider a 93.50 call. For this call 
to go into•the-money, the underlying contract must rise above 93.50. But this requires 
that interest rates fall below 6.50 percent. Therefore, a 93.50 call in listed terms is the 
same as a 6.50 put in interest rate terms. A model which Is correctly set up to evaluate 
options on Eurodollar or other types of Indexed Interest rate contracts automatically 
makes this transformation. The price of the underlying contract and the exercise price 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Volatility 69 
m subtracted. from 100, whJle listed calls are treated as puts and listed puts are treated 
as calls .. 
Note that this type of transformation ts not required for most bonds and notes. 
Depending on the coupon rate, the prices of these products may range freely without 
upper Umlt, often exceeding l 00. They are therefore most often evaluated using a 
traditional pricing model, although Interest rate products present other problems that 
may require specialized pricing models. 
It ls possible to take an Instrument such as a bond and calculate the current yield 
baSed on Its price In the marketplace . If we were to take a series of prtces and from these 
calculate a series of yields, we could also calculate the yteld volatility, I.e., the volatility 
baSed on the change In yield. We might then use this number to evaluate the theoretical 
value of an option on the bond, although to be consistent we would also have to specify 
the exercise price in terms of yield. Because It Is possible to calculate the volatility of an 
Interest rate product using these two different methods, interest rate traders sometlmes 
refer to yield volatility (the volatility calculated from the current yteld on the Instrument) 
versus price volatility (the volatility calculated from the prtce of the Instrument In the 
marketplace). 
TYPES OF VOLATWTIES 
When traders discuss volatility, even experienced traders may find that they are not 
always talking about the same thing. When a trader makes the comment that the 
volatility of XYZ Is 25%, this statement may take on a vartety of meantn~. We can avoid 
confusion 1n subsequent discussions if we first define the various ways In which traders 
Interpret volatility. 
Future Volatillty 
Future volatility ls what every trader would like to know, the volatility that best 
describes the future distribution of prices for an underlying contract In theory It ls this 
number to which we are referring when we speak of the volatility Input Into a 
theoretical pricing model. If a trader knows the future volatility, he knows the right 
'odds." When he feeds this number Into a theoretical pricing model, he can generate 
accurate theoretical values because he has the right probablllties. Uke the casino, he 
may occasionally lose because of short-term bad luck. But In the long run, with the odds 
on his side, a trader can be fairly certain of making a profit 
Of course, traders rarely talk about the future volatility since lt ls Impossible to 
know what the future holds. 
Historical Volatility 
d I t ds to use a theoretical pricing Even though one cannot know the future lf a tra er n en tl ' ab t th future volatlllty. In op on 
model he must try to make an lntelllgent guess ou ls h~stortcal data. What typically 
evaluation, as ln other dlsclpllnes, a good starting poln~ 1 the past? If, over the past ten 
has been the volatlllty of thls contract over some pert~ n 1 0% nor greater than 30%, a 
years the volatlllty of a contract has never been less :i makes sense. This does not 
guess for the future volatlllty of either 5% or 40% ha Y 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(J 
tn an that lther or these extremes ts Impossible (In option trading the JmposslbJe a1W31,1 
m to happen sooner or later), but based on past performance, and Jn the absence of 
any extr&ordlnary circumstances, a guess Within the historical JlmJts of 10% and 30% is 
probably more realistic than a guess outside these limits. Of course, 10% to 30% Is stfn 
a huge range, but at least the historical data offers a starting point. Additional lnfonna­
Uon may further narrow the estimate. 
Note that there are a variety of ways to calculate hlstorlcal volatlllty, but most 
methods depend on choosing two parameters, the hlstortcal period over whJch the­
volatility ls to be calculated, and the time interval between successive price changes. 
The historical period may be ten days, six months, five years, or any period the trader 
chooses. Longer periods tend to yield an average or characteristic vo1atllfty, whJ1e 
shorter periods may reveal unusual extremes in volatllJty. To become fu11y rammar with 
the volatlllty characteristics of a contract, a trader may have to examine a wtde variety 
of historical time periods. 
Next, the trader must decide what intervals to use between price changes. Should 
he use dally price changes? Weekly changes? Monthly changes? Or perhaps he ought 
to consider some unusual interval, perhaps every other day, or every week and a half. 
Surprisingly, the Interval which is chosen does not seem to greatly affect the result. 
Although a contract may make large daily moves, yet flnlsh a week unchanged, thlS IS 
by far the exception. A contract which ls volatile from day to day Is likely to be equaDy 
volatile from week to week, or month to month. This ls typified by the graphs in Agure 
4-8. The data points on the three graphs represent the volatility of the S&P 500 index 
over successive 50-day periods. For the solid line dally price changes were used, for the 
dotted line price changes every two days were used, and for the broken line price 
changes every 5 days were used. Even though the graphs occasionally diverge, for the 
most part they exhibit the same general volatlllty levels and trends. 
As a general rule, services which supply historical volatility data base their calcu1a­
tlons on daily settlement-to-settlement price changes. If this is not the case, an explana­
tion of how the volatility was calculated Will usually accompany the data. If, for 
example, a service gave the volatllity of a contract for the month of August as 21.6%, it 
can be assumed that the calculations were made using the daily settlement-to-settlement 
price changes for all the business days during that month. 
Historical and future volatility are sometimes referred to as reallzedvolatillty. 
Forecast Volatility 
Just as there are services which will attempt to forecast future directional moves In the 
price of a contract, there are also services which will attempt to forecast the future 
volatility of a contract Forecasts may be for any period, but most commonly cover 
periods identical to the remaining life of options on the underlying contract. For an 
underlying contract with three months between expirations, a service might forecast 
volatllltles for the next three, slx, and nine months. For an underlying wtth monthly 
expirations, a service might forecast volatilities for the next one, two, and three months. 
Due to the relatively recent introduction of options, volatlllty forecasting is still In its 
infancy, and must be considered an inexact science at best Nonetheless, a trader's guess 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Agure 4-8: S&P 500 Index So-Day Historical Volatility 
24-r-----------------------------------, 
22 
20 
-~ 0 
-18 ~ 
ls i 161 f\ 
r, ,i'-
I ... I 
I 
( GS :, 14 C 
C c( 
12 
10 ,...., r-\ 
I I 
/ l 
I \ 
\ 
I based on price changes: 
every day 
every 2nd day ----­
every 5th day ------- -. 
~·· 
r • I 
\ , ......... "'' \,,, 
t I 
I 
84------.--------.-----~---,-------r- ---------~----1 
Jan-90 May-90 Oct-90 Mar-91 Aug-91 Jan-92 ~ £ s 
~ 
Mar-90 Aug-90 Jan-91 May..Q1 Oct-91 "" -, 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

~bout the future volatility of a contract might very well take Jnto conslderat1011 r 
volatility foreca t to which he has access. 
Implied Volatility 
enerally speakJng, future, historical, and forecast volatlllty are associated with a 1 
underlying contract. We can talk about the future volatility of the S&P 500 Jndex, or the 
historical volatility of U.S. Treasury Bonds, or a forecast volatlllty for IBM stock. In eacn 
case we are referring to the volatlllty of the underlyJng contract. There Js, however, a 
different Interpretation of volatility which Is associated with an option rather than w1th 
the underlying contract. 
Suppose a certain futures contract Is trading at 98.50 with Interest rates at 8%. 
Suppose also that a 105 call with three months to expiration Is avaUable on tltls contract, 
and that our best guess about the volatility over the next three months ls 16%. If we 
want to know the theoretical value of the 105 call we might feed all these inputs into 
a theoretical pricing model. Using the Black-Scholes Model, we find that the option has 
a theoretical value of .96. Having done this we might compare the option's theoretical 
value to its price in the marketplace. To our surprise, we find that the option is trading 
for t .34. How can we account for the fact that we think the option is worth . 96, while 
the marketplace seems to believe It Is worth 1.34? 
One way to answer the question ls to assume that everyone in the marketplace is 
using the same theoretical pricing model that we are, in this case the Black-Scholes 
Model. If we make this assumption, then the discrepancy between our value of . 96 and 
the marketplace's value of 1.34 must be due to a difference of opinion concerning one 
or more of the Inputs Into the model. We can therefore start going down the list of tnputs 
and try to identify the culprits. 
We know that it can't be either the amount of time to expiration or the exerdSe 
price, since these inputs are fixed in the option contract. What about the underlying 
price of 98.50? Perhaps we think the price of the underlying is at 98.50, but it is reallY 
trading at some higher price, say 99.00. Indeed, In such circumstances it ls always wiSe 
to double check the inputs. But suppose we stlll find that the underlying ts at 98.50. 
Even given that there ls a spread between the bid and ask price, if the market is 
reasonably liquid It ls unlikely that the spread would be wide enough to cause a 
discrepancy of .38 In the value of the option. Perhaps our problem Is the interest rate of 
8%. But, as we noted in the last chapter, the Interest rate component ts usually the least 
important of the Inputs Into a theoretical prlclng model. And In the case of futureS 
options, the interest rate component ls often trivial. This leaves us with only one likely 
culprit, and that ls volatility. In some sense, the marketplace must be using a volatility 
other than 16% to evaluate the 1 OS call. 
~hat volatility Is the marketplace using? To find out, we can ask the following 
quesuon: If we hold all other Inputs constant (time to expiration, exercise price, 
underlying price, Interest rates), what volatlllty must we feed Into our theoretical pricing 
model to yield a theoretical value Identical to the price of the option In the marketplace? 
In our example, we want to know what volatlllty will yield a value of 1.34 for the t 05 
call. Clearly the volatility has to be higher than 16%, so we might sit down With a 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VoWlllty 73 
computer programmed with the Black-Scholes Model and start to raise the volatlllty. lf 
we do, we wJII flnd that at a volatlllty of 18.5% the 105 call has a theoretical value of 
1.34. We refer to this volatility as the Implied volatility or the 105 call. It ls the volatlllty 
we must feed Into our theoretlcal prtclng model to yield a theoretical value Identical to 
the price of the option ln the marketplace. We can also thJnk or It as the volatility being 
tmplled to the underlying contract through the pricing of the option In the marketplace. 
When we solve for the lmplled volatlllty of an optlon we are assuming that the 
theoretical value (the option's price) ls known, but that the volatility ls unknown. In 
effect, we are running the theoretical pricing model backwards to solve for this 
unknown, as shown ln Figure 4-9. In fact, this ls easier said than done since most 
theoretical prtclng models cannot be reversed. However, a number of computer 
programs have been written which can quickly solve for the Implied volatility when all 
other Inputs are known. 
Note that the Implied volatility depends on the theoretical pricing model being 
used. For some options, a dlff erent model can yield a significantly different Implied 
volatility. The accuracy of an lmplled volatlllty also depends on the accuracy of Inputs 
Into the model. This not only Includes the price of the option, but the other Inputs as 
well. In particular, problems can occur when an option has not traded for some time, 
but market conditions have changed significantly. Suppose In our example the price of 
t .34 for the 105 call reflected the last trade, but that trade took place two hours ago 
when the underlying futures contract was actually at 99.25. If the price of the 
underlying contract ls 99 .25, the lmplled volatility of the option at a prtce of 1.34 Is 
actually 17 .3%. This ls a significant difference, and underscores the importance of 
accurate and timely Inputs when calculating Implied volatllltles. 
Services which supply theoretical analysis of options usually Include lmplled 
volatilities. The Implied volatilities may be for each option on an underlying contract, 
or there may be one Implied volatility which Is representative of all options on the same 
Figure 4-9 
Using the Model to Solve for a Theoretical Value 
Unknown• 
Known• 
Exercise Price (105) 
Time to Expiration (3 months) 
Under1ying Futures Price (98.50) 
Interest Rates (8%) Theoretical Value 
(?7 = .96) 
Volatility (16%) 
U I th M_ ...... , to Solve for an lmplled Volatility • ng • vuw Unknown• 
Known• 
Exercise Price (105) 
Time to ExplraUon (3 months) 
Under1ying Futures Price (98.50) 
Interest Rates (8%) 
OpUon Price (1.34) Implied Volatility 
(?? = 18.5%) 
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

' 
underlying. ln Ille latter case, the figure will usually represent an average of all ii 
Individual Implied volatilities. The single Implied volatility ls weighted according tt., 
me crltena, such as volume of opUons traded, open Interest, or, as Js most common 
b a tgntng the greatest weight to the at-the-money options. 
The Implied volatility In the marketplace Is constantly changing because optl , 
prices, as well as other market conditions, are constantly changing. It ls as ff the 
marketplace were continuously polling all participants to come up with a consensu 
volatility for the underlying contract. This Is not a poll In the true sense, since all trader~ 
do not huddle together and eventually vote on the correct volatility. However, as bJd1 
and offers are made, the trade price of an option wlll represent the equl11brium between 
supply and demand. Thls equilibrium can be translated Into an Implied volatility. 
Even though the term premium really refers to an option's price, it ls common 
among traders to refer to the Jmplled volatility as the premium or premium level If the 
cmrent implied volatility ls high by historical standards, or high relative to the recent 
historical volatility of the underlying contract, a trader might say that premium levels 
are high; if Implied volatility ls unusually low, he might say that premium levels are low. 
Assuming a trader had a reliable theoretical prtclng model, If he could look into a 
crystal ball and detennlne the future volatility of an underlying contract he would be 
able to accurately evaluate options on that contract. He might then look at the difference 
between each option's theoretical value and its price in the marketplace, selling any 
options which were overpriced relative to the theoretical value, and buying any options 
which were underpriced. If given the choice between sellfng one of two overpriced 
options, he might simply sell the one which was most overpriced in total dollars. 
However, a trader who has access to implied volatilities might use a different yardstick 
for comparison. He might compare the Implied volatilltyofan option to either a volatility 
forecast, or to the implied volatility of other options on the same underlying contract. 
Going back to our example of the 105 call, we might say that with a theoretical value 
of. 96 and a prtce of 1.34, the 105 call is .38 overpriced. But In volatility terms it is 2.5% 
overpriced since Its theoretical value ls based on a volatility of 16% (the trader's volatility 
estimate) while its price is based on a volatillty of 18.5% (the implied volatility}. Due to 
the unusual characteristics of options, It is often more useful for the serious trader to 
consider an option's prtce in terms of Implied volatility rather than in terms of its total 
dollar price. 
For example, suppose a Treasury Bond 98 call ls trading for 3-32 ($3,500) with a 
corresponding Implied volatility of 10.5%. Suppose also that a 102 call wlth the same 
expiration date is trading for 1-16 ($1,250) with an implied volatility of 11.5%. In total 
dollar terms the 102 call is $2,250 cheaper than the 98 call. Yet an experienced trader 
will probably conclude that in theoretical terms the 98 call Is actually less expensive 
than the 102 call because the implied volatility of the 98 call Is a full percentage point 
less than the implied volatility of the 102 call. Does thJs mean that one ought to buy the 
98 call and sell the 102 call? Not necessarily. If the future volatllity of the Treasury 
Bonds turns out to be 8%, then both options are overpriced; whJle if volatility turns out 
to be 14%, both options are underprtced. Moreover, the leverage values of the options 
may not be the same so that their sensitivity to changes in market conditions may, under 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

75 
some circumstances, make several 102 calls a more desirable purchase than one 98 call. 
If we Ignore these considerations, tn relative terms the 98 call ls a better value because 
its Implied volatlllty ts lower. 
Whlle option traders may at times refer to any of the four types of volatllltles, two 
of these stand out In Importance, the future volatlllty and the lmplled volatility. The 
future volatlllty of an underlying contract determines the value of options on that 
contract The Implied volatUlty Is a reflection of each option's price. These two numbers, 
value and price, are what all traders, not just option traders, are concerned with. u a 
contract has a high value and a low price, then a trader Will want to be a buyer. If a 
contract has a low value and a high price, then a trader wlll want to be a seller. For an 
option trader this usually means comparing the future volatlllty wtth the tmplled 
volatillty. If implied volatility ls low with respect to the expected future volatility, a 
trader will prefer to buy options; If Implied volatlllty ls high, a trader will prefer to sell 
options. Of course, future volatility ls an unknown, so we tend to look at the historical 
and forecast volatllltles to help us make an lntelllgent guess about the future. But In the 
final analysts, it ls the future volatility which determines an option's value. 
To help the new trader understand the various types of volatlllcy, consider the 
following analogy to weather forecasting. Suppose a trader llvlng in Chicago gets up on 
a July morning and must decide what clothes to wear that day. Do you think he wm 
consider putting on a parka? This ts not a logical choice because he knows that 
hlstorlca//y It ls not sufficiently cold In Chicago In July to warrant weartng a winter coat 
Next, he might tum on the radio or television to listen to the weather forecast The 
forecaster Is predicting dear skies with temperatures around 90° (32°C). Based on this 
lnformatlon, our trader has reached a decision: he wm wear a short sleeve shirt with no 
sweater or jacket, and he certainly won't need an umbrella. However, just to be sure, 
he decides to take a look out the wtndow to see what the people outslde are wearing. 
To his surprtse, everyone Is wearing a coat and canylng an umbrella. The people outside, 
through their clothing, are tmp(y[ngcompletely different weather. What clothes should 
the trader then wear? He must make some decision, but whom should he belleve, the 
weather forecaster or the people ln the street? There can be no certain answer because 
the trader will not know the future weather until the end of the day. 
Much depends on the trader's knowledge of local conditions. Perhaps the trader 
lives in an area far removed from where the weather forecaster ls located. Then he must 
give added weight to local conditions. On the other hand, perhaps the peopl~ in the 
street all listened to a weather forecaster who has a history of playing practical Jokes. 
The decision on what clothes to wear just Uke every trading decision, depends on 
a great many factors Not only must the1 
decision be made on the basis of the beSt 
available information· but the decision must also be made with consideration for th~ 
posslblllty of error What are the benefits of being right? What are the consequences 0 
being wrong? If ~ trader falls to take an umbrella and It rains, that may be 0~ 1!:~ 
consequence if the bus picks him up right outside his resld~cs!:!1d;J;~~~ ~e ~In, 
outside hls place of work. On the other hand, If he must: The choices are never easy, 
he mJght catch the flu and be away from work fo~;~ out best In the long run. 
and one can only hope to make the decision that 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76 
Seasonal Volatility 
There Is one other type of volatility with which a commodity trader may t13ve to dtt 
Certaln agricultural commodities, such as com, soybeans, and wheat, are very se~ 
to volatility factors arising from severe seasonal weather conditions. Such condJ~ 
occur especially In the summer months when drought can destroy major portions ot, 
crop and cause prtces to fluctuate wildly. For this reason, grains show a slgni/ja:i 
Increase In volatility durtng the months of June, July, and August Conversely, theysoo-. 
a significant decrease during the early spring months, before American planting ~ 
begun but after the South Amertcan crop has been harvested. Given these factors, or...t 
must automatically assign a higher volatility to an option contract which eneoo, 
through the summer months. If, In February, a trader has assigned a voladllty of J 8% 
a May soybean contract, he wlll certainly choose some higher volatility, perhaps 2~, 
for a November contract He knows that the November contract Includes the summa 
months, whlle the May contract does not The effect of seasonal volatility on soybear4 
Is shown In Figure 4· 10. 
A trader who Is new to options might Initially question whether volatility Is really 
that Important He has probably been pursuing directional strate~es where volatllitJ 
was not a consideration. It Is also possible to pursue a variety of directional strate~es 
the option market. But If a trader has a thorough understanding of voladllty, he haS an 
additional variable with which to work. He can, In effect, approach the market fro 
two directions Instead of one. Many traders find It easier to work exclusively wl 
Figure 4-10: Monthly Soybean Volatility (1980-1992) 
60 
so 
10 
o,~~~~T -:!_--:,---,--,,---~--~-......: Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
-a-high -l!E-mean * I Courtesy of the Chicago Board of Trade. ow 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Volitlltty 77 
volatlllty, rather than try to guess market dlrectlon. Moreover, volaUUty strategies can 
be extremely profitable and, when chosen Intelligently, can even reduce a trader's risk 
exposure. These two variables, market direction and volatlllty, enable an opUon trader 
to pursue many strategies not available to the pure stock or futures trader. 
Changing our assumptions about future volatlllty can have a dramatic effect on the 
value of optlons. To see this, look at the prices, theoretlcal values, and Implied volatllltles 
ror ten-week gold options In Agure 4-11. Note the change In theoretlcal values as 
volatility is Increased from 11 % to 14% to 17%. The 360 call and put, which are 
essentially at-the-money, change by approximately 1.85 (S 185) for each three-percent· 
age-point Increase In volatlllty. While out·of·the·money opUons do not show as great a 
dollar change In value, In percent terms their sens1Uv1ty to a change In volatlllty ls even 
greater. As volatility Increases from 11 % to 14%, the 390 call and 330 put more than 
double In value, and double again as volatlllty Increases from 14% to 17%. A three-per­
centage-point change In volatlllty over ten weeks Is not at all uncommon. Indeed, the 
volaUllty of gold can show swln~ of six or seven percentage points In a relatively short 
period of time. This Is evident from the historical volatility of gold shown In Figure 4-12. 
Given its importance, it Is not surprtslng that the serious option trader spends a 
considerable amount of time thinking about volaUllty. Using hls knowledge or hJstortcal, 
forecast, lmplled, and, in the case of agricultural commodities, seasonal volatility, he 
Figure 4-11 
3 May 1991 
August Gold Futures at 358.30 
Time to expiration= 10 weeks 
Interest rate =-5.50% 
Extrclae Settltmtn t Implied !beot!Ycal ~!fue I! . 1 1 
Prtce Prfce Volatlllty Vol.= 11% Vol.= 14% Vol.= 17% 
Calls 29.69 15.36 28.27 28.84 330 29.20 
20.40 21.73 340 20.60 14.48 19.26 
13.28 15.01 350 13.20 13.86 11.61 
7.87 9.73 
360 7.80 13.89 6.02 
4.20 5.88 
370 4.20 14.00 2.62 
2.01 3.32 
380 2.40 14.93 .94 
.86 1.75 
390 1.40 15.93 .28 
Puts .87 1.72 
330 1.20 15.28 .29 3.64 2.31 
340 2.60 14.69 1.17 6.80 5.08 
350 5.10 14.04 3.41 
9.55 11.41 
360 9.50 13.92 7.70 15.77 17.45 
370 15.70 13.88 14.18 23,47 24,78 
23.70 14.57 22,40 32.20 33,08 380 
15.13 31.62 - 390 32.50 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 4-12: 10-Week Gold Volatility 
28 
26 
24 
22 --ae. -~ 20 
ii 
0 > 18 'O 
-~ iij 16 ::::, 
C 
C < 
14 
12 
10 
8 I , , 
J 87 I I an- Jul.87 S:,:i,h._AA A .. -ftft .. -- _ JuL .... Feb-88 Aug-88 Mar-89 Sep-89 ~ 
Apr-90 Nov-90 Ma~1 l...J 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

must uy to make an Intelligent decision about future volatlllty. From this, he wUl k>ok 
for option strategies which will be profitable when he ls right, but which wtll rot result 
\n a disastrous loss when he ls wrong. Because of the dlfflculty ln predlaing wlatlllty, 
a trader must always look for strategies which wUl leave the greatest margin for enor. 
No trader will survive very long pursuing strategies based on a future wladllty esttmate 
of 15% lf such a strategy results ln a loss when volatility actually turm out to be 161. 
G\ven the shifts that occur ln volatility, a one-percentage-point margin for error Is oo 
margin for error at all. 
We have not yet concluded our dlscusslon of volatlllty. But before contlnuln& lt 
wm be useful to look at option characterlstlcs, trading strategies, and rtsk constderatlons . 
We w\\l then be ln a better posltlon to examine volatlllty ln greater detail. 