••• 8 ••• • ♦ 
Volatility Spreads 
To take advantage of a theoretically mlsprlced option, It Is necessary to hedge the 
purchase or sale of the option by simultaneously taklng an opposing market posltlon. In 
the examples ln Chapter 5, the opposing market position was always taken In the 
underlying instrument It ls also possible to hedge an option posltlon With other options 
which are theoretically equivalent to the underlying Instrument. For example, suppose 
we feel a certain call with a delta of 50 ls underprtced In the marketplace. If we buy 1 o 
calls, glvtng us a total delta position of +500, we can hedge our position In any of the 
following ways: 
♦ Sell five underlying contracts 
♦ Buy puts with a total delta of -500 
♦ Sell calls, different than those which we purchased, wlth a total delta of +500 
♦ Combine several of these strategies, such that we create a total delta of -500 
With many different calls and puts available, as well as the underlying contract, 
there are many different ways of hedging our ten calls. Regardless of which method we 
choose, each spread will have certain features In common: 
♦ Each spread wlll be approximately delta neutral. 
♦ Each spread will be sensitive to changes in the price of the underlying 
Instrument 
♦ Each spread will be sensitive to changes in implied volatlllty. 
♦ Each spread will be sensitive to the passage of tlme. 
Spreads with the foregoing characteristics fall under the general heading of volatll· 
ity spreads. In this chapter we will define the basic types of volatility spreads and look 
at their characteristics, initially by examining the expiration values of the spread, and 
then by considering the delta, gamma, theta, vega, and rho associated with each spread. 
Before defining the primary types of spreads, It should be noted that spreading 
terminology ls not uniform. Traders sometimes use different terms when referrtng to the 
same spread; they sometimes use the same term when referring to different spreads. An 
attempt has been made to use the most common terminology, but alternative spread 
definitions are also given where appropriate. 
137 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

UI 
UI 
.9 138 
BACKSPREAD 
{also referred to as a ratio backspread or long ratto spread) 
A backspread Is a delta neutral spread which consists of more long (purchased) optJons 
than short (sold) options where all optlons expire at the same tlme. In order to achJeve 
this, options with smaller deltas must be purchased and optlons wtth larger delw must 
be sold. A call backspread consists of long calls at a higher exercise prtce and shon cans 
at a lower exercise price. A put backspread consists of long puts at a lower exercise pr1ce 
and short puts at a higher exercise price. 
Typical backspreads and their values at expiration are shown In Agures 8-1 and 
8·2. (These, and the example spreads In the following sections, are taken from the 
option evaluation table In Agure 8-20.) In each case, a move away from the Jong 
option's exercise price will Increase the value of the spread. Depending on the type of 
backspread, movement In one direction may be preferable to movement In the other 
direction. In a call backspread the upside profit potentlal Is unlimited; In a put 
backspread the downside profit Is unlimited. But the prtmary consideration Is that some 
movement wlll occur. U no movement occurs, a backspread Is likely to be a Iostng 
strategy. 
Typically, a backspread Is done for a credit. That Is, the amount of premium 
received for the sold options Is greater than the premium paid for the purchased options. 
This ensures that the backspread wlll be profitable If the market makes a large move In 
either direction. If the market collapses In the case of a call backspread, or the market 
Figure 8-1: Call Backspread 
long 30 March 105 calls (24) 
short 1 O March 95 calls (78) 
long 25 June 11 O calls (23) 
short 10 June 100 calls (51) sell the 
lower 
exercise 
price 
I buy the 
higher 
exercise 
price 
I 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VoLtttuo, spre,ds 
Figure s-2: Put Backspread 
Cl) 
Cl) 
0 .J buy the 
lower 
exercise 
price 
I 
I 
I ,--
I 
I sell the 
higher 
oxerclae 
price 
I 
long 80 March 90 puts (-6) 
short 10 March 100 puts (-48) 
long 45 June 95 puts (-30) 
short 30 June 100 puts (-46) /3() 
explodes in the case of a putbackspread, all options will expire worthless and the trader 
will keep the credit from the lnltlal transaction. 
A trader wlll tend to choose the type of backspread which reflects his opinion about 
market direction. If he foresees a market with great upside potential, he wlll tend to 
choose a call backspread; lf he foresees a market with great downside potential he will 
tend to choose a put backspread. He will avoid backspreads ln quiet markets since the 
underlying contract ls unlikely to move very far in either direction. 
RATIO VERTICAL SPREAD 
( also referred to as a ratio spread, short ratio spread, 
vertical spread, or front spread} 
A trader who takes the opposite side of a backspread also has a delta neutral spread, but 
he ls short more contracts than long, with all options explrlng at the same time. Such a 
spread is sometimes referred to as a ratio spread or a vertical spread. However, these 
terms can also be applled to other types of spreads. In order to avoid later confusion, we 
will designate the opposite of a backspread as a ratio vertical spread. 
Typical ratio vertical spreads, and their expiration values, are shown In Agures 8-3 
and 8-4. From these graphs we can see that a ratio vertical spread will realize its 
maximum profit at expiration when the underlying contract finishes right at the short 
(sold) option's exercise price. Since a ratio vertical spreader assumes the opposite risks 
of a backspreader, hls risk ls unlimited on the upside In a call ratio vertical spread, and 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

140 
Figure 8-3: Call Ratio Vertlcal Spread 
long 20 March 95 call• (78) 
1hort 30 March 100 call, (51) 
long 10 Jun, 95 call• (67) 
1hort 30 June 11 0 call, (23) 
buy the sell the 
lower higher 
exercise exerclH 
price price 
Figure 8-4: Put Ratio Vertical Spread 
Cl) 
ell 
.9 --1 
I long 20 March 95 puts (·21) 
short 60 March 90 puts (·6) 
long 15 June 105 puts (·62) 
short 20 June 100 puts (-46) 
sell the buy the 
lower higher 
exercise exercise 
price price .. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Vu&attuo, Sprtads /4/ 
unllmlted on the downside In a put ratlo vertical spread. WhJle a ratlo vertlcal spreader 
expects the market to remain relatively stable, he wtll tend to choose either a call or put 
ratio vertical spread In order to limit his losses If he Is wrong, If he Is prtmar1ly worried 
about a swift rise In the market, he will choose a put ratlo vertJcal spread; If he Is 
primarily worried about a swift fall In the market, he wlll choose a call ratlo vertJcaJ 
spread. In both cases, If the market does make a big move, his loss wtll be limited since 
the calls can only collapse to zero If the market falls, and the puts can only collapse to 
zero lf the market rises. 
STRADDLE 
A straddle consists of either a long call and a long put, or a shon call and a shon put, 
where both options have the same exercise prtce and expire at the same time. If both 
the call and put are purchased, the trader Is said to be long the straddle; If both options 
are sold, the trader ts said to be shon the straddle. Typical long and shon straddles, with 
their expiration values, are shown In Figures 8·5 and 8·6. 
Whlle most straddles are executed with a one-to-one ratlo (one call for each put), 
thls ls not a requirement. A straddle can also be ratfoed, so that It consists of unequal 
numbers of calls and puts. Any spread where the number of long market contracts (long 
calls or short puts) and shon market contracts (short calls or long puts) are unequal ts 
considered a ratio spread. The most common types of ratio spreads are backspreads and 
Figure 8-5: Long Straddle 
-;:: e a. 
Cl) 
Cl) 
.9 
long 10 March 100 calls (51) 
long 10 March 100 puts (-48) buy 
calls and puts 
at the same 
exercise price 
I 
I 
long 10 June 95 calls (67) 
long 25 June 95 puts (-30) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

142 
;l: e 
Cl. 
0 
0 
0 
...J short 30 March 105 calls (24) 
short 1 O March 105 puts (-75) 
sell 
calls and puts 
at the same 
exercise price ChApttr8 
short 20 June 100 calls (51) 
short 20 June f 00 puts (-46) 
ratio vertical spreads. But other spreads, including straddles, can be ratloed. This is 
usually done to ensure that the spread is delta neutral. 
A long straddle has many of the same characteristics as a backspread. Uke a 
backspread it has limited risk and unlimited profit potential. With a long straddle, 
however, the trader's potential profit is unlimited in either direction. If the market 
moves shatply up or down, the straddle will reallze ever increasing profits as long as the 
market continues to move in the same direction. 
A short straddle has many of the same characteristics as a ratio vertical spread. The 
spread will realize its maximum profit if the market stays close to the call and put 
exercise price. The spread has a limited profit potential, and unlimited risk should the 
market move violently in either direction. 
The new option trader often finds long straddles attractive because strategies with 
limited risk and unlimited profit potential offer great appeal, especially when the profit 
is unlimited in both directions. However, if the hoped for movement falls to materialize, 
he soon finds that losing money little by little, even a lJmited amount, can also be a 
painful experience. This ls not an endorsement of either long or short straddles. Under 
the right conditions either strategy may be sensible. But the lntellJgent trader's primary 
concern ought to be the total expected return. If the strategy with the greatest expected 
return also entails unlimited risk, a trader may have to accept that risk as part of doing 
business. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Volatility Spreads 143 
STRANGLE 
Uke a straddle, a strangle cons ls ts of a long call and a long put, or a short call and a short 
put, where both optlons expire at the same time. In a strangle, however, the options 
have dlfferent exercise prices. If both options are purchased, the trader Is long the 
strangle; lf both options are sold, the trader ls short the strangle. Typical long and short 
strangles are shown ln Figures 8-7 and 8-8. 
Strangles have characteristics slmllar to straddles, and are therefore similar to 
backspreads and ratio vertical spreads. Like a long straddle, a long strangle needs 
movement to be profitable, and has unltmlted profit potential should such movement 
occur. Uke a short straddle, a short strangle has unllmlted risk In either direction, but 
will show a profit If the underlying market remains ln a narrow trading range. 
If a strangle ts simply ldentlfled by Its expiration month and exercise prices, there 
may be some confusion as to the specific options Involved. A June 95/ l 05 strangle 
might consist of a June 95 put and June 105 call. But It might also consist of a June 95 
call and a June 105 put. Both these comblnatlons are consistent wtth the deflnltlon of 
a strangle. To avoid confusion a strangle ts commonly assumed to consist of out·of·the­
money options. If the underlying market ls currently at 100 and a trader wants to 
purchase the June 95/1 OS strangle, lt ls assumed that he wants to purchase a June 95 
put and a June 105 call. When both optlons are In-the-money, the posltlon ts sometimes 
ref erred to as a guts. 
Figure 8-7: Long Strangle 
buy 
puts (calls) 
at a lower 
exercise price 
I 
long 20 March 1 05 calls 
long 20 March 95 puts buy 
calls (puts) 
at a hlgher 
exercise price 
I 
I 
I 
I 
long 30 June 11 O calls 
long 15 June 100 puts 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

144 c,,,pu,I 
Figure 8-8: Short Strangle 
~ e 
Q. short 30 March 11 O calls 
short 40 March 90 puts short 1 O June 95 calls 
short 10 June 105 puts 
I 
----1-. 
I 
sell 
puts (calls) 
at a lower 
exercise price I 
I 
sell 
calls (puts) 
at a higher 
exercise price 
In the absence of other Identifying Information, stran~es, like straddles, are usually 
executed with a one-to-one ratio (one call for each put). However, there Is no law 
against executing a strangle with some other ratlo. If the call has a delta of 15 and the 
put has a delta of -30, and a trader wants to be delta neutral, It Is perfectly acceptable 
to trade two calls for each put. 
If we Ignore the limited or unlimited risk/reward characterlsUcs of backspreads, 
long straddles, and long stran~es, these spreads essentlally differ In the degree of desired 
movement A baclcspread needs some market movement to show a profit, a long straddle 
needs more movement, and a long strangle needs even greater movement Indeed, a 
strangle Is usually considered the most highly leveraged of all optlon positions because 
out•of·the-money options are cheap relative to other options. Several stran~es can often 
be purchased for the prtce of just one straddle. If slgnJflcant movement occurs with such 
a posltlon, Its value can Increase dramatically. But there Is a tradeoff. If movement falls 
to occur, the position wlll SW!ftly lose Its value through the passage of time. 
The same conslderatlons of degree are also true for ratio vertical spreads short 
straddles and short stran"'es A ti ' 1 
& • ra o vertical spread, a short straddle and a shott strangle all want the market to sit sun But a In ' 
highly leveraged of these post ti If • ga , the stran~e Is considered the most 
sit sun his profits will usually 0~:·; trad: sells several stran~es and the market does 
moderate sized ratio verucal spread tter an If he had sold one straddle or done a 
large move, shortstran~es also entaii t11' however, the market makes an unexpectedly 
e greatest risk. All optlon po~ltlons are a tradeoff 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Volutllty Sprtads l4S 
between rtsk and reward. If the reward ls great, so Is the risk; If the rtsk 1s small, so Is 
the reward. 
Based on their slmllar characterlstlcs , It Is sometimes convenient to classify Jong 
straddles and long strangles as special types of backspreads . This follows logically from 
the definition or a backspread: long more contracts than short, with all opUons expiring 
ln the same month. A Jong straddle or strangle consists only or long optlons (long calls 
and long puts), with aH options expiring at the same tlme. Hence, these posltlons are 
backspreads. (Even though the owner of a put has a short market position, he 1s said to 
be long the put because he has purchased It.) 
The same reasoning leads us to classify short straddles and strangles as special types 
of ratlo vertical spreads. Short straddles and strangles consist only of shon options, with 
all options expiring at the same Ume. Hence, the posltlons conform to our deflnltlon of 
a rauo verucal spread. 
BUTTERFLY 
Thus far we have looked at spreads which Involve buying or selllng two different optlon 
contracts. However, we need not restrict ourselves to two-sided spreads. We can also 
construct spreads conslstlng of three, four, or even more different optlons. A butterfly 
consists of options at three equally spaced exercise prices, where all options are of the 
same type (either all calls or all puts) and expire at the same time. In a long butterfly the 
outside exercise prtces are purchased and the Inside exercise prtce ls sold, and vice versa 
for a short butterfly.1 Moreover, the ratlo of a butterfly never varies. It ls always 1 x 2 
x 1, with two of each Inside exercise price traded for each one of the outside exercise 
prices. If the ratio ls other than 1 x 2 x 1, the spread ls no longer a butterfly. Typical 
examples of long and shon butterflies are shown In Figures 8-9 and 8-10. 
Since a butterfly consists of equal numbers of long and short options, It does not flt 
conveniently Into the backspread or ratlo vertical spread category. However, as com­
monly traded, a long butterfly tends to act like a ratio vertical spread and a short butterfly 
tends to act like a backspread. To understand why, consider a trader who buys a 
95/ 100/ 105 call butterfly (long a 95 call, short two 100 calls, long a 105 call). What 
wlll be the value of this position at explratlon? If the underlying contract ls below 95 at 
expiration all the calls wlll expire worthless, and the value of the posltlon will be zero. 
If the underlying contract ls above 105 at expiration, the value of the 95 and 105 calls 
together wlll be Identical to the value of the two 100 calls. Again, the value of the 
butterf1y will be zero. Now suppose the underlying contract ls somewhere between 95 
and 105 at expiration, specifically, right at the Inside exercise price of l 00. The 95 call 
wlll be worth 5 points, while the 100 and 105 calls will be worthless. The position wlll 
therefore be worth 5 points. If the underlying moves away from I 00 the value of the 
butterf1y will decline, but Its value can never fall below zero. 
I. The Jnstde exercise price ts someumes referred to M the body of the butterfly, whJJe the outside 
exercise prices are referred to M the wings. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

146 --, 
Clupttra 
Figure 8-9: Long Butterfly 
-~ e 
0. long 10 March 95 calls (78) 
snort 20 March 100 calls (51) 
long 1 o March 105 calls (24) long 30 June 90 puts (•17) 
short 60 June 95 puts ( ·30) 
long 30 June 100 puts (-46) 
buy a sell two buy a 
call (put) calls (puts) call (pU1) 
at a lower at a middle at a higher 
exercise price exercise price exercise price 
Figure 8-10: Short Butterfly 
U) 
U) 
.9 sell a 
call (put) 
at a lower 
exercise price 
I 
I 
short 20 March 100 puts (-48) 
long 40 March 105 puts (-75) 
short 20 March 110 puts (-91) buy two 
calls (puts) 
atamlddle 
exercise price 
I 
I 
I 
I sell a 
call (put) 
at a higher 
exercise price 
-'--~----------1 
I 
I 
short 25 June 95 calls (67) 
long 50 June 100 calls (51) 
short 25 June 105 calls (36) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

..,.......-
Volatility Sprtads 147 
At expiration a butterfly wlll always have a value somewhere between zero and the 
amount between exercise prtces. It will be worth zero If the underlying contract ls 
below the lowest exercise price or above the highest exercise price, and It wm be worth 
Its maximum If the underlying contract ls right at the Inside exercise price. 
Since a butterfly has a value between zero and the amount between exercise prices 
(S points In our example), a trader should be willing to pay some amount between zero 
and S for the position. The exact amount depends on the likelihood of the underlying 
contract finishing right at or close to the Inside price at explratlon. If there ls high 
probablllty of this occurring, a trader might be willing to pay as much as 41/4 or 4112 for 
the butterfly, since It might very will expand to Its full value of 5 points. If, however, 
there ls a low probablllty of this occurring, and consequently a high probability that the 
underlying contract wlll finish outside the extreme exercise prices, a trader may only be 
willing to pay 112 or 3/4, since he may very will lose his entlre Investment 
Now we can see why a long butterfly tends to act like a ratlo vertical spread. If a 
trader feels that the underlying contract will remain within a narrow range untll 
expiration, he can buy a butterfly where the Inside exercise price ls at-the-money. If he 
ls right, and the market does stay close to the Inside exercise price, the butterfly will 
expand to its maximum value (figure 8-9). A long butterfly tends to act like a ratio 
vertical spread since tt Increases In value as the underlying market sits still. 
In contrast, the trader who sells a butterfly wants the underlying market to move 
as far away from the Inside exercise price as possible so that the posltlon will expire with 
the underlying contract either below the lowest exercise price or above the highest 
exercise price. In this case, the butterfly will expire worthless and he will be able to 
keep the full amount he received when he sold the butterfly (Figure 8-10). A short 
butterfly tends to act llke a backspread since It Increases ln value with movement In the 
underlying market 
Why are the strategies In Figure 8·9 referred to as "long" butterflies, and the 
strategies in Figure 8-10 referred to as "short" butterflies? It Is common practice to refer 
to a spread which requires an outlay of capital as a Ion& or purchased, spread. If a trader 
Initiates a butterfly by purchasing the outside exercise prices and selllng the Inside 
exercise price, he has a position which can never be worth less than zero at expiration. 
The trader can therefore expect to lay out some amount of capital for the position when 
he initiates it. When the trader does this, he has purchased, or ts "long," the butterfly. 
(If a trader can initiate a long butterfly for a credit, he should do It as many times as the 
law wlll allow; he can't lose.) When the trader sells the outside exercise prices and 
purchases the inside exercise price, he can expect to receive some amount of capital. 
He has sold, or ts "short," the butterfly. 
Since all butterflies are worth their maximum amount when the underlying 
contract ls right at the inside exercise price at expiration, both a call and put butterfly 
with the same exercise prices and the same expiration date desire exactly the same 
outcome, and therefore have identical characteristics. Both the March 95/100/1 OS call 
butterfly and the March 95/ 100/1 OS put butterfly will be worth a maximum of 5 with 
the underlying contract right at 100 at expiration, and a minimum value of zero with 
the underlying contract below 95 or above 1 OS. If both butterflies are not trading at the 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

148 
same price, there Is a sure profit opportunity available by purchasing the cheaper and 
selllng the more expensive. 2 
If a trader foresees a quiet market, why might he choose a long butterfly over some 
other type or strategy, for example a shon straddle? An Important characterlstJc of a 
butterlly Is Its limited risk. If a trader ln!Uates a long butterfly In the belief that the marut 
Is unlikely to move very far from the current price, the most he can lose lf he ts wroni 
Is the amount he laid out to purchase the butterfly. On the other hand, If a trader $ells 
a straddle and the market makes a large move, hls potential risk Is unlimited. Regardless 
of theoretical considerations, some traders are not comfortable With the possibility of 
unllmlted risk. If given the choice between purchasing butterflies and selllng straddles, 
they will prefer the former strategy to the latter. 
Of course the straddle, while riskier, also has greater profit potentlal. If a trader 
Intends to purchase butterflies but wants a potential profit commensurate with that of 
a short straddle, he will have to trade butterflies In much greater size. A trader who 1s 
considering the sale of 25 straddles might decide Instead to buy 100 butterflies ( 100 x 
200 x t 00). While trading 100 spreads may appear riskier than trading 25 spreads, l 00 
butterllles may In fact be much less risky than 25 straddles because of the rtsk 
characteristics associated with a butterlly. A trader should never confuse size and rtsk. 
Risk often depends on the characteristics of the strategy, not on the size In which the 
strategy Is executed. 
TIME SPREAD 
( also referred to as a calendar spread or horizontal spread) 
If all options In a spread expire at the same time, the value of the spread Is simply a 
function of the underlying price at expiration. If, however, the spread consists of options 
which expire at different times, the value of the spread cannot be determined until both 
options expire. The spread's value depends not only on where the underlying market ls 
when the short-term option expires, but also on what will happen between that tlme 
and the tlme when the long-term option expires. Time spreads, sometimes ref erred to 
as calendar spreads or horizontal spreads, 3 consist of opposing positions which expire 
In dlff erent months. 
The most common type of time spread consists of opposing positions in two options 
of the same type (either both calls or both puts) where both options have the same 
exercise price. When the long-term option Is purchased and the short-term option ls 
sold, a trader Is long the time spread; when the short-term option is purchased and the 
long-term option Is sold, the trader Is short the time spread. Since a long-term option 
will have more time value, and therefore a higher price than a short-term option, this is 
consistent with the practice of referring to any spread which ls executed at a debit 
(credit) as a long (short) spread position. 
2. This Is not nece$MJJy the case ll the spreads consist of Amedcan opUons, where there Js a ~ibillty 
of early exercise. A sure profit would eXlst only ll one were certain of carrying the posJtlon to expiration. 
3. Expiration months were orlg1nally listed horizontally on exchange option displays Hence the term 
horizontal spread. • 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Volltlltty Spreads /49 
Although time spreads are most commonly executed one-to-one (one contract 
purchased for each contract sold), a trader may ratio a time spread to reflect a bullish, 
bearish, or neutral market sentiment. For the present we will assume that all time 
spreads will be ratloed delta neutral. Typical long and short time spreads are shown In 
Agures 8· 11 and 8-12. 
A time spread has different characteristics from the other spreads we have dis­
cussed, because Its value depends not only on movement in the underlying market, but 
also on other traders' expectations about future market movement as reflected In the 
Implied volatility. If we assume that the options making up a time spread are approxi­
mately at•the-money, time spreads have two important characteristics. 
A long time spread always wants the underlying market to sft still. An Important 
characteristic of an at-the-money option's theta (time decay) Is its tendency to become 
Increasingly large as expiration approaches. As time passes, a short·tenn at-the-money 
option, having less time to expiration, will lose its value at a greater rate than a long-tenn 
at•the-money option. (Note the value of at-the-money options in Figures 6-13 and 6-14, 
and the theta values In Figure 6-15.) This principle has an important effect on the value 
of a time spread. 
For example, suppose two at-the-money calls, one with three months to expiration 
and one with six months to expiration, have values of 6 and 71121 respectively. The value 
of the spread Is therefore 1 112. If one month passes and the underlying market ls 
unchanged, both options will lose value. But the short-term option, with its greater 
theta, will lose a greater amount. If the long-term option loses 1/4, the short-tenn option 
Figure 8· 11: Long Time Spread (Value at Near Term Expiration) 
(I) 
(I) 
.9 long 20 June 100 calls (51) 
short 20 March 100 calls (51) 
buy a long term option 
at one exercise price 
sell a short term option 
of the same type long 10 June 95 puts (-31) 
short 10 March 95 puts (·21) 
at the same exercise price 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

150 Chapttr4 
~F-,-lg-ur-e-=a---:1~2-:: .· S::-:-h-o-=-rt-=T::-lm-e--:s=--p-re-a-:d "'ii('l:.:a-.:-Iu-=-=-e--=a-;-t N;..-e=-=a--r ·re-rm--=E,...xp__,l,...,_ra-tl-o--:n ,---
-~ ... a. 
Ill Ill 0 ..J •1ong 10 March 105 calls (24) 
short 10 June 110 calls (23) buy a short term option 
al one exercise price 
sell a long term option 
of the same tyPe 
al the same exercise price 
'lechnlcally a diagonal spread, bul wilh many of lhe 
same characterlstlcs as a time spread long 25 March 100 puts (-48) 
short 25 June 100 puts (-47) 
may lose a full point. Now the options are worth 5 and 7¼, and the spread is worth 
2¼. If another month passes and the market ls still unchanged, both options will 
continue to decay, But, again, the short-term option, with less time remaining to 
expiration, will decay at a greater rate. If the long-term option loses ½, the short term 
option may lose 2 points. Now the options are worth 3 and 6¾, and the spread has 
increased in value to 3¾. Finally, if at expiration the market is still unchanged, the 
short-term option, since it is still at-the-money, will lose all of its remaining value of 3 
points. The long-term option will continue to decay but will do so at a slower rate. If 
the long-term option loses ¾, it will be worth 6 points, and the spread will be worth 6 
points (Figure 8· 13}. 
What will happen if the underlying market makes a larger move? Assume as before 
that both options are at-the-money and have values of 7½ and 6. As the underlying 
market rises and options move more deeply into-the-money, they begin to lose their time 
value. If the move is large enough, it won't matter that the long-term option has three 
more months remaining to expiration. Both options will eventually lose all their time 
value (see Figures 6-15 and 6· 16). If the time spread consists of calls, both of which have 
exercise prices of 100, and the underlying market moves from 100 to I 50, both options 
might trade at parity (Intrinsic value}, or 50 points. The spread will then go to zero. Even 
If the long-term option retains as much as ¼ point, the spread will still have collapsed to ¼. 
What about a large downward move in the underlying market? The situation is 
almost identical to an upward move. As an option moves further out-of-the-money its 1 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Vollttill(y preRds 111 
e-13: The Effect of Time Passage on Tim• Spr 
Time to Expfratlon 
L ng-term option 6 months 5 months 4 months 3 months 
Short-term option 3 months 2 months 1 month none 
Option Value 
Long--term option 7½ 71/4 63/,t 6 
Short-term option 6 5 3 0 
Spread Value 1½ 21/4 3a;,. 6 
time value also begins to shrink. Here, however, neither option wlll have any lntrlnslc 
value, so that if the market moves down far enough both options will eventually be 
worthless. If that happens, the time spread will be worthless. If, as above, the long-term 
option retains even 1/4 point in value, the spread will still collapse to l/4 point. 
Since a short-term at-the-money option always decays more quickly than a long­
term at-the-money option, regardless of whether the options are calls or puts, both a 
long call time spread and a long put time spread want the underlying market to sit still. 
Ideally, both spreads would like the short-term option to expire right at-the-money so 
that the long-term option will retain as much time value as possible while the short-term 
option expires worthless. 
If a long time spread wants the market to sit still, logically a short time spread wants 
the market to move. It may therefore seem that, as with backspreads and ratio vertical 
spreads, the major consideration in deciding whether to Initiate a long or short time 
spread is the likelihood of movement In the underlying market. Certainly time spreads 
are sensitive to movement in the price of the underlying, but time spreads are also 
sensitive to changes in implied volatility. 
A long time spread always benefits from an increase in implied volatility. Look 
again at Figure 6-18, the relationship between an option's vega (sensitivity to a change 
in volatility) and the time remaining to expiration. As time to expiration Increases, the 
vega of an option increases. This means that a long-term option ls always more sensitive 
in total points to a change In volatility than a short-term option with the same exercise 
price. 
For example, assume again that a 100 call time spread ls worth l 1/2 (long-and 
short-term options with values of 71/2 and 6, respectively) . Assume also that the value 
of the spread ls based on a volatility of 20%. What will happen to the value of the spread 
if we raise volatility to 25%? Both options will Increase In value since an increase in 
volatility increases the value of all options. But the long-term option, with more time 
remaining to expiration and therefore a higher vega, will gain more value as a result of 
the increase In volatility. If the short-tenn option gains 112, the long-term option may 
gain a full point. Now the options will be worth 8112 and 6½, and the spread will have 
widened from 1112 to 2 (Rgure 8-14). 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

152 Chapttra 
Flgurt 8-14: Tho Effect of Volatlllty on Time Spreads 
Vol11tlllty 15% 20% 25% 
Option Value 
Long t8rm option 6% 71/2 8½ 
Short t8rm option 5% 6 6½ 
Spread Value 1½ 2 
Conversely, if we lower our volatility estimate to 15%, both options wlll lose value. 
But the long-term option, with more time remaining to expiration, will be more sensitive 
to the change In volatility and will lose a greater amount. The new option values might 
be 61/2 and 51/2, causing the spread to narrow to 1 point. 
The effects of volatility on a time spread become especially evident when there is 
a change in implied volatility In the option market. When lmplled volatility rises, time 
spreads tend to widen; when Implied volatlllty falls, time spreads tend to narrow. This 
effect can often be great enough to offset either a favorable or unfavorable move in the 
underlying market. A trader who Is long a time spread expects to lose money if the 
underlying market makes a swift move in either direction. He knows that time spreads 
begin to collapse as the options move into-or out-of-the-money. But if this movement 
is accompanied by a sufficient increase in Implied volatility, the increase In the spread's 
price due to the Increase In Implied volatility may actually be greater than the loss due 
to market movement In that case the trader may find that the spread has actually 
widened. Conversely, If the market sits still, the trader expects the spread to widen 
because of the short-term option's greater time decay. But If, at the same time, there is 
a collapse In implied volatility, the decline in the spread's price due to the decline in 
implied volatility may more than offset any gain from the passage of time. If this happens, 
the trader may find that the spread has narrowed. 
These two opposing forces, the decay in an option's value due to the passage of 
time and the change in an option's value due to changes In volatility, give time spreads 
their unique characteristics. When a trader buys or sells a time spread, he Is not only 
attempting to forecast movement In the underlying market. He is also trying to forecast 
changes in implied volatility. The trader would like to forecast both inputs accurately, 
but often an error In one Input can be offset by an accurate forecast for the other input. 
Ideally, the trader who Is long a time spread wants two apparently contradictory 
conditions In the marketplace. First, he wants the underlylng market to sit still so that 
time decay will have a beneficial effect on the spread. Second, he wants everyone to 
think the market Is going to move so that Implied volatility will rise. This may seem an 
impossible scenario, the market remaining unchanged but everyone thinking It will 
move. In fact, this happens quite often because events which don't have an Immediate 
effect on the underlying market could be perceived to have a future effect on the market. 
Suppose an announcement Is made that the finance ministers of the major Indus­
trtallzed countries plan to meet to discuss exchange rates. If no one knows what the 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VoLtttllty Spreads 153 
outcome or the meeting wlll be, there Is unlikely to be any slgnlflcant move In the 
currency markets when the lnltlal announcement ls made. On the other hand, all 
traders wlll assume that major changes In exchange rates could result from the meeting. 
This possibility wlll result In an Increase In Implied volatlllty In the currency optlon 
market. The lack of movement In the underlying market, together with the Increase In 
Implied volatility, wlll cause time spreads to widen. 
Suppose that, as a result of the meeting, the finance ministers decide to maintain 
the status quo. Now expectations or a major change In exchange rates fade, Implied 
volatility falls, and, as a result, time spreads narrow. 
Scenarios with similar consequences also occur In the Interest rate options market 
when a policy statement ls expected from the Federal Reserve In the United States, or 
when a company's earnings are due to be reponed In the stock option market These 
events are unlikely to have an effect on the underlying market before the fact, but they 
could have significant repercussions after the fact. 
The effect of Implied volatility ls what dlstlngulshes time spreads from the other 
types of spreads we have discussed. Backspreads (Including long straddles, long stran­
gles, and short butterflies) and ratio vertical spreads (Including short straddles, short 
strangles, and long butterflies) want real volatlllty (price movement in the underlying 
market) and Implied volatility (a reflection of expectations about future price movement 
in the underlying market) to either both rise or both fall. A swift move in the underlying 
market or an Increase In lmplled volatility wlll help a backspread. A quiet market or a 
decrease in Implied volatlllty will help a ratio vertical spread. With time spreads, 
however, real and Implied volatility have opposite effects. A big move In the underlying 
market or a decrease In Implied volatility will help a short time spread, while a qulet 
market or an increase in implied volatility will help a long time spread. This opposite 
effect Is what gives time spreads their unique characteristics. 
While the foregoing characteristics of time spreads apply to all option markets, 
there may be other considerations, depending on the specific underlying market. We 
previously assumed that the price of the underlying contract for both the short· and long­
term option was the same. In the stock option market this will always be true because 
the underlying for every expiration ls the same stock. The underlying contract for all 
IBM options, regardless of the expiration month, ls always IBM stock. And IBM stock 
can only have a single price at any one time. In contrast, the underlying for a futures 
option ls a specific futures contract. Consider this situation for Eurodollar futures and 
options traded at the CME: 
March Eurodollar Futures= 93.90 
June Eurodollar Futures = 93.75 
Suppose a trader lnltlates a long time spread: 
long IO June 94.00 calls 
short l O March 94.00 calls 
The underlying for March Eurodollar options Is a March Eurodollar futures con­
tract; the underlying for June Eurodollar options Is a June Eurodollar futures contract. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

154 c,uplP 
Whlle the March and June Eurodollar futures contracts are related, they are ~_.. 
ldentlcal. It Is not impossible for one futures contract to go up while the other 
down. As a result, In addltlon to volatlllty conslderatlons , a trader whO buys 
June/March Eurodollar optlon call tlme spread also has to worry about the rtsk of 
June futures contract falling while the March futures contract Js nsJng. Is there any 
to offset this risk? 
If, ln our example, the spread between the March and June futures conrncu, 
which ls currently .15, be~ns to widen, the option spread wlll narrow regardles.s 
volatility considerations. If, however, when the trader lnltlates the optlon spread, ht 
also executes a futures spread by purchasing March futures and selllngJune futures, 
will have a posltlon which Will offset any Joss to the optlon spread resulting from a 
widening in the futures spread. 
How many futures spreads should the trader execute? He ought to rrade the 
number of futures spreads required to be delta neutral. If the delta of both options Is 40 
and the trader executes the option spread ten times, he wlll be long 400 deltas ln Ju 
and shon 400 deltas In March. Therefore, he should buy 4 March futures contracts and 
sell 4 June futures contracts. The entire spread will look like this (deltas are 1D 
parentheses): 
long l O June 94.00 calls (40) short 4 June futures (100) 
short 10 March 94.00 calls (40) long 4 March futures (100) 
This type of balancing Is not necessacy, Indeed not possible, In stock options 
because the underlying for all months Is Identical. There Is no such thing as March IBM 
stock or June IBM stock. 
THE EFFECT OF CHANGING INTEREST 
RATES AND DIVIDENDS 
Thus far we have considered only the effects of changes in the price of the underlying 
market and changes In volatility on the value of volatility spreads. What about changes 
In Interest rates and, In the case of stocks, dlvtdends? 
Because there Is no carrying cost associated with the purchase or sale of a futures 
contract, Interest rates have only a minor Impact on futures options, and, consequently, 
a negligible effect on the value of futures opUon volatillty spreads. 4 If, however, we are 
trading stock options and change the Interest rate, we change the forward price of stock 
(the current stock price plus the carrying cost on the stock to expiration). When all 
options expire at the same time, as they do In backspreads and ratlo vertical s reads 
the forward stock price for all options remains the same, so that the effects of the ~han ' 
are practlcally negligible. If, on the other hand, we are conslderln sto ge 
different expiration dates, we must consider two different forward p~c ~~tions with 
forward prices may not be equally sensitive to a change In Interest ra:s, Fo these two 
consider the following situation: es. r example, 
4. Interest rates can of count dect the relattve value of different futures months. As 
thJs rlsk by trading a funires spread along wJth the futures opUon time spread. noted, we can offset 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

\'4-~lltl/tcy Sprtlds /SJ 
Stock price = l 00 Interest rate = 12% Dividend = o 
St1ppose a trader lnltJates a long tJme spread: 
long l O June l 00 calls 
short IO March l 00 calls 
tr there are three months remaining to March explratlon and six months remaining to 
June explratlon, the rorward prices for March and June stock are 103 and t 06 
rtspecuvely . Ir Interest rates drop to 8 percent, the forward price for March wlll be I 02 
and the forward price ror June wlll be I 04. With more tlme remaining, the June forward 
pr\ce ts more sensltlve to a change In Interest rates. Assuming the deltas or both optlons 
are approximately equal, the June optlon wlll be more affected In total points by the 
decline In Interest rates than the March optlon, and the time spread wlll narrow. In the 
same way, If Interest rates Increase, the time spread wlll widen because the June forward 
prtce wtll rise more quickly than the March rorward prtce. Therefore, a long (shon) call 
tlme spread In the stock optlon market must have a positive (negatlve) rho. 
Changes In Interest rates have just the opposite effect on stock option puts. In our 
example, If Interest rates fall from 12% to 8% the March forward price will fall from 103 
to 102, while the June forward price will fall from 106 to 104. Again, If we assume that 
the deltas of both options are approximately equal, and recalling that puts have negauve 
deltas, the June put wlll show a greater Increase In value than the March put The put 
time spread wlll therefore widen. In the same way, If Interest rates Increase, the put 
time spread will narrow. Therefore, a long (short) put tlme spread In the stock opUon 
market must have a negaUve (posltlve) rho. 
The degree to which stock option time spreads are affected by changes In Interest 
rates depends primarily on the amount of tlme between expiration dates. If there are slx 
months between expiration dates (e.g., March/September) the effect will be much 
greater than If there Is only one month between expiration dates (e.g., March/ Aprtl). 
Changes In dividends can also affect the value of stock option Ume spreads. 
Dlvtdends, however, have the opposite effect on stock options as changes ln interest 
rates (see Chapter 3). An Increase (decrease) In dividends lowers (raises) the forward 
price of stock. If all options In a volatility spread expire at the same time (backspreads, 
ratlo vertical spreads), the forward stock price will be Identical for all options and the 
effect on the spread wlll be negligible. But In a time spread, If a dividend payment Is 
expected between expiration of the short·term and long-term option, the long-term 
option will be affected by the lowered forward price of the stock. Hence, an Increase In 
dividends, If at least one dividend payment Is expected between the expiration dates, 
will cause call time spreads to narrow and put time spreads to widen. A decrease In 
dividends will have the opposite effect, with call time spreads widening and put tlme 
spreads narrowing. The effect of changing Interest rates and dividends on stock option 
time spreads Is shown In Figure 8· 15. 
Even If both options are deeply In-the-money, a call time spread In the stock option 
market should always have some value greater than zero. If volatility Is very low, the 
spread should still be worth a minimum of the cost of cany on the stock between 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

156 
Figure 8-16 
The Effects of Changing Interest Rates on Stock Option Time Spr 
Stock Prtce = 100; VolaUllty = 20%; 
Time to March explraUon = 6 weeks Dividend= O 
Time to June expiration = 19 weeks 
If lnterett rat11 are ... 0% 3% 6% 9"/4 12% 
June 100 call 4.81 5.35 5.92 6.52 7.15 
March 100 call 2.71 2.88 3.05 3.24 w -- 3.72 Call Spread Value 2.10 2.47 2.87 3.28 
June 100 put 4.81 4.26 3.76 3.30 2.88 
March 100 put 2.71 2.53 2.37 2.21 2.06 - - - ,82 Put Spread Value 2.10 1.73 1.39 1.09 
The Effect of Changing Dividends on Stock Option Time spreads 
Stock Price = 100; Volatility = 20%; Interest Rate = 6.00% 
Time to March expiration = 6 weeks 
Time to June expiration = 19 weeks 
If the quarterfy dividend Is ... 0 1.00 2.00 3.00 4.00 
June 100 call 5.92 4.81 3.82 2.97 2.26 
March 1 00 call 3.05 2.53 2.07 1.66 1.31 -Call Spread Value 2.87 2.28 1.75 1.31 .95 
June 100 put 3.76 4.62 5.62 6.75 8.01 
March 100 put 2.37 2.84 3.37 3.96 4.62 - --
Put Spread Value 1.39 1.78 2.25 2.79 3.39 
expiration months. This is only true, however, if a trader can cany a short stock position 
between expiration months. If a situation arises where no stock can be borrowed, the 
trader who owns a time spread may be forced to exercise his long-term option, thereby 
losing the time value associated with the option. 
As an example, suppose In February a company's stock is trading at 70, when a 
tender offer Is made to buy a portion of the outstanding stock at a price of 80. If a trader 
is Jong a June/March 70 call time spread, he will be assigned on the March 70 call 
because the holder of that call wants to tender his stock for sale at 80. The trader is now 
short stock and long a June 70 call. The June call should still cany some time value 
because of the Interest which can be earned on the short stock to June expiration. But 
In order to carry a short stock position, the trader must dellver the stock to the exercJser 
of the March 70 call. To deliver the stock, he must borrow lt from someone. Unfortu­
nately, no one wlll lend stock to the trader because everyone wants to tender the stock 
for sale at the tender price of 80. Unless the trader wants to go Into the market and buy 
the stock at the tender prtce of 80, he will be forced to exercise his June 70 call. This Js 
the only method by which the trader can obtain stock for dellvery to the exerciser of 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

\ \>t.t,1~ 5prt,ds 157 
th~ March 70 call. Even though the June 70 call should In theory have some Ume value, 
the trader will be forced to discard the time value In order to fuJflll hls delivery 
obllgaUon. 
ln the roregolng situation, sometimes referred to as a short squeeze, a trader Is 
forced to exercise calls wlth some tlme value remalnlng because no stock can be 
borrowed to carry a short stock posltJon. Anyone who owns the June/March 70 call 
tlme spread wm be forced to exercise the June 70 call, and the price or the tlme spread 
,vtu collapse to zero. Note that this situation ls not the same as a buy•out, where all the 
stock ln a company ls purchased at one prtce. Although a tender offer was made at 80 
lt was for only a portlon of the company's outstanding stock. When the tender 1; 
completed, the remaining stock wlll contlnue to trade, most Ukely at Its pre-tender pnce 
of 70. 
DIAGONAL SPREADS 
A diagonal spread Is slmllar to a time spread, except that the options have different 
exercJse prices. WhJle many diagonal spreads are executed one·to-one (one long-term 
option for each short·tenn option), diagonal spreads can also be ratloed, with unequal 
numbers of long and short market contracts. With the large number of variations ln 
diagonal spreads, lt Is almost Impossible to generalize about their charactertstlcs as we 
can with backspreads, ratio vertical spreads, and long and short time spreads. Each 
diagonal spread must be analyzed separately, often using a computer, to determine the 
risks and rewards associated with the spread. 
There ts, however, one type of diagonal spread about which we can generalize. If 
a diagonal spread is done one-to-one, and both options are of the same type and have 
approximately the same delta, the diagonal spread will act very much like a conven• 
tlonal time spread. An example of a such diagonal spread Is shown tn Figure 8· 12. 
OTHER VARIATIONS 
The spreads we have thus far defined are the primary types of volatility spreads, and are 
the ones most commonly executed In the marketplace. There are, however, some 
variations of which the reader ought to be aware. 
A Christmas tree (also referred to as a ladder) ls a term which can be applied to a 
variety of spreads. The spread usually consists of three different exercise prtces where 
all options are of the same type and expire at the same time. In a long (short) call 
Christmas tree, one call ls purchased (sold) at the lowest exercise price, and one call is 
sold (purchased) at each of the higher exercise prices. In a long (short) put Christmas 
tree, one put ls purchased (sold) at the highest exercise price, and one put Is sold 
{purchased) at each of the lower exercise prices. Christmas trees are usually delta 
neutral, but even with this restriction, there are many ways to execute the spread. Some 
examples of Christmas trees are shown In Figure 8· 16. 
Long Christmas trees, when done delta neutral, can be thought of as particular 
types of ratio vertical spreads. Such spreads therefore Increase In value lf the underlying 
market either sits still or moves very slowly. Short Christmas trees can be thought of as 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

/SB 
Figure 8-16 
Long Chr1tbnH TrHI 
long 10 March 95 calls (78) 
short 10 March 100 calls (51) 
short 10 March 105 calls (24) 
long 25 June 110 puts (-75) 
short 25 June 100 puts (-47) 
short 25 June 95 puts (-31) Short Chrf1bn11 TrN• 
short 5 June 90 calls (81) 
long 5 June 100 calls (51) 
long 5 June f 05 calls (36) 
short 50 March 110 puts (-91) 
long 50 March 105 puts (-75) 
long 50 March 95 puts (-21) C!IJpitrl 
partlcular types of backspreads, and therefore Increase In value with big moves ln the 
underlying market. 
It Is possible to construct a spread which has. the same characteristics as a butterfly 
by purchasing a straddle (strangle) and selling a strangle (straddle) where the straddle ls 
executed at an exercise price midway between the strangle's exercise prices. All optlons 
must expire at the same time. Because the position wants the same outcome as a 
butterfly, It Is known as an Iron butterfly. Like a true butterfly, at expiration an Iron 
butterfly has a minimum value of zero and a maximum value of the amount between 
exercise prtces. 
Note that If the straddle Is purchased and the strangle Is sold, the position will result 
In a debit (a long Iron butterfly). Such a position will show Its greatest profit at expiration 
If the underlying market finishes beyond the outside (strangle's) exercise prices. A long 
Iron butterlly ls therefore equivalent to a short butterfly. If the straddle Is sold and the 
strangle ls purchased, the position wlll result In a debit (a short Iron butterfly). Such a 
position wlll show Its greatest profit at expiration If the underlying market finishes right 
at the Inside (straddle's) exercise prtce. A short Iron butterfly Is therefore equivalent to 
a long butterfly. Examples of long and short Iron butterflies are shown In Figure 8-17. 
Another variation on a butterfly, known as a condor, can be constructed by spllttlng 
the Inside exercise prices. Now the position consists of four options at consecutive 
exercise prices where the two outside options are purchased and the two Inside options 
sold (a long condor), or the two Inside options are purchased and the two outside 
options sold (a short condor). As with a butterfly, all options must be of the same cype 
(all calls or all puts) and expire at the same time. 
At expiration a condor wlll have its maximum value, equivalent to the amount 
between consecutive exercise prices, when the underlying contract Is at or anywhere 
between the two Inside exercise prices. It wlll be worthless whenever the underlying 
contract Is outside the extreme exercise prices at expiration. Note that this Is very similar 
to a butterfly, except that a condor has a maximum value over a wider range of 
underlying prices. A butterfly will achieve Its maximum value at expiration at only one 
underlying price, when the underlying contract Is right at the Inside exercise price. For 
this reason a condor will usually have a higher value than a butterfly with approximately 
the same exercise prices. Examples of long and short condors are shown In Figure 8-18. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

~ 
Volltlllty Sprtads 
Figure 8-17 
Long Iron Butter1llet 
long 10 March 100 calls (51) 
long 10 March 100 puts (-,48) 
short 10 March 105 calls (24) 
short 1 o March 95 puts (-21) 
long 50 June 1 oo calls (51) 
long 50 June 100 puts (-47) 
short 50 June 11 o calls (23) 
short 50 June 90 puts (-17) Short Iron Buttertllee 
short 15 June 100 cans (51) 
short 15 June 100 puts (-47) 
long 15 June 105 cans (36) 
long 15 June 95 puts (-31) 
short 25 Maret, 105 cans (24) 
short 25 Maret, 105 puts (-75) 
long 25 Maret, 11 o calls (8) 
long 25 Maret, 100 puts (-48) 
SPREAD SENSITMTIES /59 
Just as every Individual option has a unique delta, gamma, theta, vega, and rho 
associated with It, every spread position has unique sensitivities. These numbers can 
help a trader determine beforehand how chan~ng market conditions are likely to affect 
the spread. Before proceeding further the reader may want to review Figure 6-2 7, which 
summarizes the significance of the slwis associated with the various option sensitivities. 
A trader who Initiates a volatility spread Is concerned primarily with the mawiltude 
of movement In the underlying contract and only secondarily with the direction of 
movement. Therefore all volatility spreads will be approximately delta neutral (the 
deltas will add up to approximately zero). It Is true that some volatility spreads may 
prefer movement In one direction rather than the other, but the primary consideration 
Is whether movement of any type will occur. If a trader has a large positive or negative 
delta, such that directional considerations become more Important than volatility 
considerations, then the position can no longer be considered a volatility spread. 
All spreads which are helped by movement In the underlying market have a positive 
gamma. These Include backspreads, long straddles, long stran~es, short butterflies, and 
shon time spreads. All spreads which are hurt by movement In the underlying market 
wlll have a negative gamma. These Include ratio vertical spreads, short straddles, short 
Figure 8-18 
Long Condot'I 
long 10 March 90 calls (93) 
short 10 March 95 calls (78) 
short 10 March 100 calls (51) 
long 10 March 105 calls (24) 
long 25 June 95 puts (-31) 
short 25 June 100 puts (-47) 
short 25 June 105 puts (~2) 
long 25 June 110 puts (-75) ShortCondot'I 
short 50 March 95 puts (-21) 
long 50 March 100 puts (-48) 
long 50 March 105 puts (-75) 
short 50 March 110 puts (-91) 
short 5 June 90 calls (81) 
long 5 June 95 calls (67) 
long 5 June 100 calls (51) 
short 5 June 105 calls (36) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ft,() 
strtmgle~. long butterntes, and long time spreads. A trader who has a posltJve gamm 
sometimes said to be long premtumand Is hoping for a volatJle market With large mo-v 
In the underlying contract. A trader who has a negative gamma Is sometimes said en ,.,-, 
short premium and Is hoping for a quiet market with only small moves In the underly1n 
market. 
Since the effect of market movement and the effect of t1me decay always work I 
opposite directions, any spread With a positive gamma will necessarily have a negatlv~ 
theta. Any spread with a negative gamma wlll necessarily have a posltJve theta. If mar 
movement helps, the passage of time hurts. If market movement hurts, the passage of 
time helps. An option trader can't have It both ways. 
Spreads which are helped by a rise In volatlllty have a positive vega. These includ 
backspreads, long straddles, long strangles, short butterflies, and long ume spreads. 
Spreads which are helped by a decline In volatility have a negative vega. These Include 
ratio vertical spreads, short straddles, short strangles, long butterflies, and short time 
spreads. In theory, the vega refers to the sensitivity of a theoretical value to a change in 
the volatllity of the underlying contract over the llfe of the option. In practice, however, 
traders tend to associate the vega with the sensitivity of an option's price to a change in 
implied volatility. Spreads with a positive vega will be helped (hun) by any increase 
(decrease) in Implied volatility. Spreads with a negative vega will be helped (hurt) by 
any decrease (increase} in implied volatility. 
The delta, gamma, theta, and vega associated with the primary types of volatility 
spreads are summarized in Figure 8-19. Since the delta of a volatility spread is assumed 
to be approximately zero, and since the theta ls always of opposite sign to the gamma 
but of similar magnitude, we can place every volatility spread into one of four categories 
based on the sign of the gamma and vega associated with the spread: 
Category Gamma Vega 
Backspread Positive Positive 
Ratio Vertical Spread Negative Negative 
Long Time Spread Negative Positive 
Short Time Spread Positive Negative 
If a trader ls approximately delta neutral-no matter how complex the position, 
even if it includes options of different types, at many different exercise prices, and with 
several different expiration dates-he can always place the position in one of th.ese four 
general categories based on the gamma and vega of the position. The extent to which 
he is pursuing one of these strategies will depend on the magnitude of the gamma and 
vega. A trader with a gamma of-100 and vega of +200 would describe his position as 
a long time spread, but not nearly to the degree of a trader who has a gamma of -1500 
and a vega of +3000. 
Figure 8-20 is an evaluation table with the theoretical value, delta, gamma, theta, 
and vega of several different options. Following this table are examples of volatility 
spreads of the types discussed In this chapter, along with their total delta, gamma, theta, 
and vega. (Although the examples In Figure 8-20 are based on futures options, the , 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I!' ·, 
Volllill(Y Sprtlds Jt,/ 
Figure 8-19: Characteristics of Volatlllty Spreads 
Spread Type Dtlta Gamma Thtta Vega 
Position PotlUon Po.don Potltlon 
Back.spread 0 + -+ 
long Straddle 0 + -+ 
Long Strangle 0 + -♦ 
Short Butterfly 0 ♦ -♦ 
Ratio VerUcal Spread 0 -♦ 
Short Straddle 0 - ♦ 
Short Strangle 0 - ♦ 
Long Butterfly 0 - + 
long Time Spread 0 - + + 
Short Tlme Spread 0 ♦ 
spread characteristics are equally valid for stock options.) The reader wlll see that each 
spread does Indeed have the positive or negative sensitivities summarized In figure 
8-19. Note also that a volatlllty spread need not be exactly delta neutral. (Indeed, as we 
saw In Chapter 6, no trader can say with any certainty whether he Is delta neutral.) A 
practical guide Is for the delta to be dose enough to zero so that the volatility 
considerations are more Important than the directional considerations. 
Note that no prtce Is given for any of the option contracts In figure 8·20, and 
therefore no theoretical edge can be calculated for any of the spreads. The prtces at 
which a spread Is executed may be good or bad, resulting In a positive or negative 
theoretical edge. But once the spread has been established, the market conditions which 
wlll help or hurt the spread are detennlned by Its type, not by the Initial prtces. Uke all 
traders, option traders must not let their previous trading activity affect their current 
judgement A trader's prtmary concern ought never be what happened yesterday, but 
what he can do today to make the most of the current situation, whether that means 
maximizing his potential profit or minimizing his potential loss. 
CHOOSING AN APPROPRIATE STRATEGY 
With so many spreads available, how do we know which type of spread Is best? Flrst 
and foremost we wlll want to choose spreads which have a positive theoretical edge to 
ensure that If we are right about market conditions we can be confident of showing a 
profit Ideally, we would like to construct a spread by purchasing options which are 
underprlced and selling options which are overpriced. If we can do this the resulting 
spread, whatever Its type, will always have a positive theoretical edge. 
More often, however, our opinion about volatility will result In all options appear­
Ing either underprtced or overpriced. When thls happens, It will be Impossible to both 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 8-20: Examples of Volatility Spreads 
5 February 1993 
March Futures= 100.00• Time to Expiration = 6 weeks Volatility = 20.0% Interest Rate = 6.00% 
CALLS PUTS 
Exercise TheoreUcal TheoreUcal 
Prtce Value Delta Gamma Theta Vega Value Delta Gamma Theta Vega 
Mar90 10.10 93 1.7 -.0069 .040 .17 -6 1.7 -.0090 .040 
Mar95 5.82 78 4.3 -.0221 .100 .85 -21 4.3 -.0232 .100 
Mar 100 2.69 51 5.8 -.0313 .134 2.68 -48 5.8 -.0313 .134 
Mar 105 .95 24 4.6 -.0250 .107 5.92 -75 4.6 -.0240 .107 
Mar 110 .26 8 2.3 -.0124 .055 10.16 -91 2.3 -.0103 .055 
June Futures= 100.00• Time to expiration = 19 weeks VolaUlity = 20.0% Interest Rate = 6.00% 
CALLS PUTS 
Exercl- Theoretical Theoretlcal 
Price Value Delta Gamma Theta Vega Value Delta Gamma Theta Vega 
Jun90 10.97 81 2.1 - .0090 .154 I 1.18 -17 2.1 -.0111 .154 
Jun95 7.45 67 2.9 -.0140 .209 2.55 -31 2.9 -.0151 .209 
Jun 100 4.71 51 3.2 - .0166 .234 4.71 -47 3.2 -.0166 .234 
Jun 105 2.n 36 3.0 -.0160 .221 7.66 -62 3.0 -.0149 .221 
Jun 110 1.52 23 2.5 -.0132 .182 11.30 -75 2.5 -.0111 .182 
• For simplicity we assume that both futures cxmtracts are tracing at the same price. 
f -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

~ 
Voll/Utty Sprtads /63 
Figure 8.20: examples of Volatility Spreads (contlnUtd) 
CALL BACKSPREAD : LonQ more calls than short; all calls expiring al the same Ume. 
Dtlta Gamma Thtll Vega 
PotlUon PotlUon Potltlon Potlllon 
Long 30 March 105 calls t30 x24 t30x4.6 +30x-.0250 t30 X .107 
Short 10 March 95 calls -10 X 78 -10 X 4.3 -10x-.0221 -10x.100 
~ t95.0 -.9710 t2.210 
Long 25 Jun 11 o calls +25 X23 +25x2.5 t25x -.0132 +25x.182 
Short 1 o Jun 100 calls -10 X 51 -10 X 3.2 -10 x-.0166 -10x.234 
t65 +30.5 -.1840 +2.210 
PUT BACKSPREAD : Long more puts than short; all puts explnng at the same Ume. 
Dtlta Gamma Theta Vega 
Poelllon Potlllon PotlUon Position 
Long 80 March 90 puts -+60 )( -8 +60 x 1.7 +60 X -.0090 -+a0 X .040 
Short 10 Maleh 100 puts -10 x -48 -10 x 5.8 -10 x -.0313 -10 x .134 
0 +78.0 -.4070 +1.860 
Long 45 June 95 puts +45 X -31 +45 X 2.9 +45 x -.0151 -+-45 X .209 
Short 30 June 100 puts -30 )( -47 -30 x 3.2 -30 x -.0166 -30 )( .234 
+15 +34.5 -.1815 t2385 
CALL RA TIO VERTICAL SPREAD: Short more calls than long; all calls expiring at the same Ume. 
Dtlta Gamma Theta Vega 
Position Position Potlllon Position 
Long 20 March 95 calls t20x78 +20x4.3 +20x-.0221 t20x.100 
Short 30 March 100 calls -30 x51 -30x5.8 -30 x-.0313 -3() X .134 
+30 -as.o t.4970 -2.020 
Long 10 June 90 calls +10x81 +10x2.1 +10x-.0090 +tOx.154 
Short 20 June 105 calls -20 x36 -20x3.0 -20x-.0160 -20 X .221 
+90 -39.0 t.2300 -2.880 
PUT RA TIO VERTICAL SPREAD: Short more puts than long; al puts expimg at the same time. 
Delta Gamma Theta Vega 
POtlllon Potltlon Potldon Position 
Long 20 March 95 puts t20x-21 +20x4.3 +20x-.0232 +20x.100 
Short 60 Marcil 90 puts -60x-o -60 X 1.7 -60 x-.0090 -oOx.040 
~ -16.0 +.0760 -.400 
Long 15 June 105 puts +15x-o2 +15x3.0 +15 x-.0149 t15 X .221 
Short 20 June 100 puts -20x-47 -20x3.2 -20 x-.0166 -20x.234 
+10 -19.0 +.1085 -1.365 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

164 
lgure 8·20: Examples of Volatlllty Spreada (continued) 
LONG STRADDLE : Long cans and puts with the same expiration date and exercise p 
Delta Gamma Theta Vega 
Pffltlon Pottltlon Poeltlon poefflon 
Long 1 O March 100 calls +10 X +5f +10 X 5.8 +10 x-.0313 +10x.13 
long 10 March 100 puts +fO x-48 +10 X 5.8 +10 x-.0313 +10 X. 134 
+30 +116.0 -.6260 +2.680 
Long 1 o June 95 calls +10 X +67 +10 X 2.9 +10 x-.0140 +10 X .209 
Long 25 June 95 puts +25 x--31 +25 X 2.9 +25 x-.0151 +25 X .209 
-105 +101.5 -.5175 +7.315 
SHORT STRADDLE: Short calls and puts with the same expiration date and exercise prfce. 
Delta Gamma Theta Vega 
Poeltlon Pottltlon Poeltlon Position 
Short 30 March 105 calls --30 X +24 -30 x4.6 -30 x-.0250 -30 X .107 
Short 10 March 105 puts -10x-75 -10 x4.6 -10 x-.0240 -10x.107 
+30 -184.0 +.9900 -4.280 
Short 20 June 100 calls -20 X +51 -20 X 3.2 -20 X -.0166 -20 X .234 
Short 20 June 100 puts -20 X -47 -20 X 3.2 -20 X -.0166 -20 X .234 
-80 -128.0 +.6640 +9.36 
LONG STRANGLE: Long calls and puts with the same expiration date but different exercise 
prices. 
Delta Gamma Theta Vega 
Position Pottltlon Position Position 
Long 20 March 105 calls +20 x+24 +20x4.6 +20 x-.0250 +20 X .107 
Long 20 March 95 puts +20x-21 +20x4.3 +20 x-.0232 +20 X .100 
+60 +178.0 -.9640 +4.140 
Long 30 June 11 O calls +30 x+23 +30x 2.5 +30 x-.0132 +30 X .182 
Long 15 June 100 puts +15x-47 +15 X 3.2 +15 x-.0166 +15 X .234 
-15 +123.0 -.6450 +8.970 
SHORT STRANGLE : Short calls and puts with the same expiration date but cifferent exercise 
prices. 
Delta Gamma Theta Vega 
Poeltlon Poeltlon Poeltlon ~n 
Short 30 March 110 calls -30 x+8 -30x2.3 -30 x-.0124 -30x .055 
Short 40 March 90 puts -40x~ -40 X 1.7 -40 x-.0090 -40x.040 
0 -137.0 +.7320 -3.250 
Short 1 o June 95 calls -10 X +67 -10 X 2.9 -10 x-.0140 -10 X .209 
Short 10 June 105 puts -10 x~2 -10x 3.0 -10x-.0149 -10 X .221 
-50 -59.0 +.2890 -4.300 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Vot.tiltty Sprtads 165 
Figure a-2o: Examples of Volatility Spreads (continued) 
LONG BUTTERFLY: Short two opUons at the same exercise prlco, and long one option with 
an lmmedately higher exercise price and one opllon with an lmmociately lower exercise prlco; 
an options are ol the same typo and expire at the same time. 
Otlta Gamma Theta Vega PollUon Po1IUon Polltlon Po1ltlon 
long 1 o March 95 calls +10x78 +10x4.3 +10x-,0221 +10x,100 
Short 20 March 100 calls -20 X 51 -20 x 5.8 -20 X -,0313 -20 X ,134 
long 10 March 105 calls +10x24 +10 X 4,6 +10 x-.0250 +10x.107 0 -27,0 t,1550 -.610 
long 30 June 90 puts +30 x-17 +30 x 2.1 +30 X -,0111 t30 X .154 
Short 60 June 95 puts -60 X-31 -60 x2.9 -60 x-.0151 -60x.209 
long 30 June 100 puts +30x-47 +30 x3.2 -30 x-,0166 ~34 -60 -15,0 +.0750 -.900 
SHORT BUTTERFLY: Long two options at the same exercise price, and short one opUon with 
an lmmedately hlg,er exercise price and one opUon with an lmmeciately lower exercise price; 
an options are of the same type and expire at the same time. 
Dtlta Gamma Theta Vega 
PollUon Po11don PollUon Po11Uon 
Short 20 March 100 puts -20 X-48 -20 x5.8 -20 x-.0313 -20 X ,134 
long 40 March 105 puts t40x-75 t40x4.6 +40 x-.0240 t40X,107 
Short 20 March 110 puts -20 x-91 -20x2.3 -20 x-.0103 -20 X.055 
-220· +22.0 -.1280 +.500 
Short 25 June 95 calls -25 x67 -25x2.9 -25 x-.0140 -25x .209 
Long 50 June 100 calls +50 x51 +50 X 3.2 +50 x-.0166 +50 x .234 
Short 25 June 105 calls -25x36 -25 x3.0 -25 x-,0160 -25 X .221 
-25 +12.5 -,0800 t.950 
• Note that because the ratio of a butterfly Is always 1 x 2 x 1, the butterfly can become 
unbalanced If the exercise prices are far away from the current underlying price. 
LONG TIME SPREAD: Long a long-term option and short a short-term option where all op-
tlons have the same exercise price and are or the same type. 
Otlta Gamma Theta Vega 
PollUon Po11Uon PollUon Poeltlon 
long 20 June 100 calls +20 X 51 +20x3.2 +20 x-.0166 +20 X ,234 
Short 20 March 100 calls -20 x51 -20x5.8 -20 x-.0313 -20 X ,134 
0 -62.0 +.2940 +2.000 
Long 10 June 95 puts +10x-31 +10x2.9 +10 x-.0151 +10 X .209 
-10x4.3 -10 x-.0232 -10x.100 
Short 1 o March 95 puts -10 x-21 t.0810 + 1,090 
-100 -14.0 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

166 C/IIPll11 
Figure 8-20: Examples of Volatility Spreads -(continued) 
SHORT TIME SPREAD: Short a long-term option and long a short-term option vmere al op­
Uons have the same exercise prtce and are or the same type. 
Long 25 March 100 puts 
Short 25 June 100 puts Delta 
POlltlon 
+25 X-18 
-25 X-17 
-25 Gamma 
Potltlon 
+25x5.8 
-25 x3.2 
+65.0 Theta Vega 
POlltlon poeltlon 
+25 x-.0313 +25 ,c .134 
-25 x-.0166 -25><.234 
-.3675 -2.500 
•Long 10 March 105 calls 
Short 10 June 110 calls +10 X24 
-10 X 23 +10 X 4.6 
-10 x2.5 +10 x-,0250 +1ox.107 
-10 x-.0132 -1ox.182 
+10 +21.0 -.1180 -.750 
• Although this Is technically a diagonal spread, It will tend to act like a time spread because Ile 
options have deltas v.tlich are approximately equal. 
buy underprlced and sell overpriced options. Such a market can be easily Identified by 
comparing our volatillty estimate to the lmplled volatility in the option marketplace. If 
Implied volatility ls generally lower than our volatility estimate, all options wlll appear 
underprlced. If implied volatility Is generally higher than our estimate, all options w1ll 
appear overpriced. 
If options generally appear underprfced (low fmplfed volattlfty), look for spreads 
with a positive vega. This Includes strategies In the backspread or long time spread 
category. If options generally appear overpriced (high Implied volatility), look for 
spreads with a negative vega. This Includes strategies In the ratio vertical or short time 
spread category. 
It may seem at first glance that If one encounters a market where all options are 
either underprlced or overpriced, the sensible strategies are either long straddles and 
strangles, or short straddles and strangles. Such strategies will enable a trader to take a 
position with a positive theoretical edge on both sides of the spread. Straddles and 
strangles are certainly possible strategies when all options are too cheap or too expen­
sive. We wlll see In Chapter 9 that straddles and strangles, while often having a large, 
positive theoretical edge, can also be among the riskiest of all strategies. For this reason, 
a trader will often want to consider other spreads In the backspread or ratio vertical 
spread category, even if such spreads entail buying some overvalued options or selling 
some underprlced options. 
,.., The theoretical values and deltas in Figure 8-20 have been reproduced In Figures 
8-21 and 8-22, but now prices have been included whlch reflect Implied volatilities 
different from the volatility Input of 20%. The prices In Figure 8-21 reflect an Implied 
volatlllty of 17%. In this case the reader will find that only those spreads wtth a positive 
vega will have a positive theoretical value: 
call and put backspreads 
long straddles and strangles 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Vo&itlltty SprtadS 167 
Figure a-21 IMPLIED VOLATILITY • 17o/, 
Maittt Fu\Jres .100.00 lime to Explrallon • 6 weeks Volatility • 20% lnter&st ■ 6.00% 
CALLS PUTS 
Exe,me Thtorldcal Thtorttlcal 
Pt1ce Pl1ct Value Delta Price Value Delta 
90 10.00 10.10 93 .07 .17 ~ 
95 5.54 5.82 78 .57 .85 -21 
100 2.28 2.69 51 2.28 2.68 --48 
105 .65 .95 24 5.62 5.92 -75 
110 .12 .26 8 10.05 10.16 -91 
.MG FubJras. 100.00 Tine to ExplraUon 1113 weeks VolaUli~. 20% lnter&st • 6.00% CALLS PUTS 
ExerclM Thlorllc:al 1htoNllail 
Prtce Price Value Dtlta Prtce Value Delta 
90 10.54 10.97 81 .75 1.18 -17 
95 6.83 us 67 1 .94 2.55 -31 
100 4.00 4.71 51 4.00 4.71 --47 
105 2.11 2.77 36 7.01 7.66 -62 
110 1.00 1.52 23 10.79 11.30 -75 
Flgurea-22 
IMPLIED VOLATILITY= 23% 
Malth Fu1Ures = 100.00 lime to Expiration = 6 weeks Volatility = 20% lnler&St = 6.00% 
CALLS PUTS 
ExlfCIM Thtcnllcal Thtorttlcal 
Prlce Price Value Delta Prk:e Value Dtlta 
90 10.23 10.10 93 .30 .17 -6 
95 6.12 5.82 78 1.16 .85 -21 
100 3.09 2.69 51 3.09 2.68 -48 
105 1.28 .95 24 6.25 5.92 -75 
110 .44 .26 8 10.37 10.16 -91 
June Futums = 100.00 Tme to Expiration= 13 weeks Volatility= 20% lnterast = 6.00% 
CALLS PUTS 
Exll'cllt Thtortllcll Theorlllcal 
I Prtce Prtct Value Dtlta Price Value Delta 
I 90 11.45 10.97 81 1.66 1.18 -17 
95 8.08 7.45 67 3.19 2.55 -31 
100 5.42 4.71 51 5.42 4 .71 -47 
105 3.44 2.n 36 8.34 7.66 -62 
110 2.08 1.52 23 11.87 11.30 -75 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

168 
short butternles 
long time spreads 1,Apttf 8 
The prices In Figures 8-22 renect an Implied volatility of 23%. Now the reader wf 11 
find that only those spreads with a negauve vega will have a posltlve theoretlcal value: 
call and put rauo vertical spreads 
short straddles and strangles 
long butterflies 
short time spreads 
An Important assumption In most theoretical pricing models is that volatilitY i 
constant over the life of an option. The volatility input into the model Is assumed to b 
the one volatility which best descrtbes prlce fluctuations In the underlying Jnsrrument 
over the life of the option. When all options expire at the same time, Jt ls this one 
volatility which will, In theory, detennlne the deslrablllty of a spread. In real life, 
however, a trader may believe that volatility Is likely to rise or fall over some period of 
time. Very often Implied volatility will also rise or fall. Since time spreads are particularly 
sensitive to changes ln implied volatility, whether volatility Is rising or falling can affect 
the desirability of time spreads. Consequently, we can add this corollary to our spread 
guidelines: Long time spreads are likely to be profitable when implied volatility ts low 
but ts expected to rise; short time spreads are likely to be profitable when tmplled 
volatility ts high but ts expected to fall 
These are only general guidelines, and an experienced trader may decide to violate 
them if he has reason to believe that the implied volatility will not correlate with the 
volatility of the underlying contract. A long time spread might still be desirable in a high 
implied volatility market, but the trader must make a prediction of how implied volatility 
might change under certain conditions. If the market were to stagnate, with no 
movement in the underlying contract, but the trader felt that implied volatility would 
remain high, a long time spread would be a sensible strategy. The shon-term option 
would decay, while the long-tenn option would retain its value. In the same way, a short 
time spread might still be desirable in a low implied volatility market if the trader felt 
that the underlying instrument were likely to make a large move with no commensurate 
increase in implied volatility. 
ADJUSTMENTS 
A volatility spread may initially be delta neutral, but the delta of the position Is likely to 
change as the price of the underlying contract rises or falls. Moreover, changes in 
volatility and time to expiration can also affect the delta of spread. A spread which is 
delta neutral today may not be delta neutral tomorrow, even If all other conditions 
remain the same. The optimum use of a theoretical pricing model requires a trader to 
continuously maintain a delta neutral position throughout the life of the spread. 
Continuous adjustments are Impossible in real life, so a trader ought to give some 
thought to when he will adjust a position. Essentially, we can consider three possibill· 
ties: 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

~ 
Volatl/Uy Sprtads • 169 
1. Adjust at regular fnterva/9-In theocy, the adjustment process Is assumed to 
be continuous because volatility Is assumed to be a continuous measure of the 
speed of the market. In practice, however, volatility ls measured over regular tlme 
Intervals, so a reasonable approach Is to adjust a position at similar regular Intervals. 
If a trader's volatility estimate Is based on dally price changes, the trader might 
adjust dally. If the estimate Is based on weekly prtce changes, he might adjust 
weekly. This Is a trader's best attempt to emulate the assumptions built Into the 
theoretical pricing model. 
2. Adjust when the position becomes a predetermined number of deltas Jong 
or short-Vecy few traders Insist on being delta neutral all the time. Most traders 
realize that this Is not a reallstic approach, both because a continuous adjustment 
process Is physically Impossible, and because no one can be certain that all the 
assumptions and Inputs In a theoretical pricing model, from whlch the delta ls 
calculated, are correct Even If one could be certain that all delta calculations were 
accurate, a trader might still be willing to take on some directional rtsk. But a trader 
ought to know just how much directional risk he Is willing to accept. u he wants 
to pursue delta neutral strate~es, but believes that he can comfortably live with a 
position which Is up to 500 deltas long or short, then he can adjust the position any 
time his delta position reaches this limit. Unlike the trader who adjusts at regular 
Intervals, a trader who adjusts based on a fixed number of deltas cannot be sure 
how often he will need to adjust his position. In some cases he may have to adjust 
vecy frequently; In other cases he may go for long periods of time without adjusting. 
The number of deltas long or short a trader chooses for hls adjustment points 
depends on the size of his positions and his capltallzation. A small, Independent 
trader may find that he ls uncomfortable with a position whlch Is even 200 deltas 
long or short, whlle a large trading finn may consider a position which ls several 
thousand deltas long or short as being approximately delta neutral. 
3. Adjust by feel-This suggestion Is not made facetiously. Some traders have 
good market feel. They can sense when the market Is about to move In one 
direction or another. If a trader has this ability, there ls no reason why he shouldn't 
make use of It. For example, suppose that the underlying market ls at 50.00 and a 
trader Is delta neutral with a gamma of-200. If the market falls to 48.00, the trader 
can estimate that he Is approximately 400 deltas long. If 400 deltas Is the limit of 
risk he Is willing to accept, he might decide to adjust at this point If, however, he 
ls also aware that 48.00 represents strong support for the market, he might choose 
not to adjust under the assumption that the market Is likely to rebound from the 
support level. If he Is right, he wlll have avoided an unprofitable adjustment Of 
course If he Is wrong and the market continues downward through the support 
level, he wlll regret not having adjusted. If the trader Is rtght more often than not, 
there Is no reason why he shouldn't take advantage of th1s skill. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BNTBRING A SPREAD ORDER 
In sophlsUcated opuon marketS, spreads are traded as If they are one, single c0n 
This means that a sp~ad Is quoted with a sln~e bid price and a sln~e off~ pt1 
example, suppose a trader Is Interested In buying a certain straddle and receives a quuv~ 
from a market-maker of 3.45/3.55. If the trader wants to sell the straddle, he wJil 
to do so at a prtce of 3.45 (the bid price); If he wants to buy the straddle, he wt11 
to pay 3.55 (the ask price). If the trader decides he Is willing to pay 3.55, neither he n 
the market-maker care whether the trader pays 1.75 for the call and 1.80 for the pu"' 
or 1.55 for the call and 2.00 for the put, or some other combination of call and 
prices. The only consideration Is that the prices of the call and put taken together a 
up to 3.55. 
A market-maker wlll always endeavor to give one bid price and one ask price fo 
an entire spread. If the spread Is a common type, such as a straddle, strangle, butterfly, 
or time spread, a bid and ask can usually be given very quickly. Of course, market-mak­
ers are only human. If a spread Is very complex, Involving several different options in 
unusual ratios, It may take a market-maker several minutes to calculate the value of the 
spread. But regardless of the complexity of a spread, the market-maker will make an 
effort to give his best two-sided (bid and ask) market 
Spread orders, like Individual option orders, can be submitted with qualifying 
instructions. The most common types are market orders (orders to be filled at the 
current market price) and limit orders (orders to be filled at a specified price). Other 
contingency orders may also include Instructions specifying how the order is to be 
executed in the marketplace. The following contingency orders, all of which are defined 
in Appendix A, are often used In option markets: 
All Or None 
Fill Or Kill 
Immediate Or Cancel 
Market If Touched 
Market On Close 
Not Held 
One Cancels The Other 
Stop limit Order 
Stop Loss Order 
Two typical spread orders, submitted with their contingency Instructions, are 
shown In Figures 8·23a and 8-23b. 
A broker executing a spread order Is responsible for adhering to any special 
instructions which accompany the order. Unless a trader knows exactly what current 
market conditions are, or has a great deal of confidence In the broker who will be 
handling the order, It ls always a good practice to submit specific Instructions with the 
order as to how It Is to be filled. Additionally, when one considers all the Information 
that must be communicated with a spread order (the expiration months, the exercise 
prices, the type of options, whether the order ls a buy or sell, the ratio), It Is easy to see 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Volittll(y spreads 171 
Figure S-231 
FUTURES ORDER 
Accotrit Ntinber--====-- Broker ---=.-=.-:...-:...-:....-::...Memo ____ _ 
$ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ23456789%S 
BUY I SELL 
1'5 Cr~ Oi \ Jan. \9 C I 2.5 Gl,C\e Od feb. 19 C 
.24 ~ an indication of the --. y ~ 
prices the broker • 
should look at 
I )( \ 
spread ratio .20 Crtd,t 
spread price A\\ or None 
how incorrect information might inadvertently be transmitted wtth the order. For this 
reason, it is also a good practice to recheck all orders before submitting them for 
execution. Option trading can be dlfflcult enough without the additional problems of 
miscommunication. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

172 Chapttra 
Figure 8-23b 
C 
MAY 
\0 OEX ~ 
JUL I OCT ~25 11'2 
AUG 
\()l. STOCK SEP 
av@ C ® CON 
CXL, 
JAN' .• 
FEB 
~' ~-!•-... 1'·' ' MN\ 
.,., ... ..u. ~ •• ';:•tt,f I 
\\_ .:a~,. t, 
MJG 
\Ol '-I srocK • SEP 
OE)( 
L\lL\-L\16 
OPEN order to be executed 
with OEX between 
these prices 
TAKEN BY I RNR I ARM 
M/M ACCT• DEC} EXPX I PREM. 
SPO 
SOL 
APR 
W(f 
.~ J\~· :il/4 
OCT 
• ,.. I •"'•• 
I 
~PX ' PREM.· 
.. \, I 
1».10 ., . -.J 'l, -~· L .J 
' 
,,:, -~ > • . , . 
• spread ratiof • ~--~ .,"_·;i 
l;. ,.., ' •· -, "'•• • •' :._· • 
\ Pol nt_: ~tfot-
.. ~-. 't 
• .., '--¥-M' J ,•4.. ~ 
spread price f~r''. )p.0 :•t. 
each 1 by 2 ratio ·(;-t:-· :t 
:? 
' 
ARM FB/B8 
EX. TIME 