The Language of Options 
Every option market brings together traders and investors With different expectations 
and goals. Some enter the market with an opinion on which dlrectlon prices will move. 
Some Intend to use options to protect existing positions against adverse prtce move­
ment. Some hope to take advantage of pr1ce discrepancies between similar or related 
products. Some act as middlemen, buying and selling as an accommodation to other 
market participants and hoping to profit from the difference between the bid and ask 
price. 
Even though expectations and goals differ, every trader's education must begin 
wlth an introduction to the tennlnology of option trading, and to the rules and 
regulations which govern trading activity. Without a faclllty In the language of options, 
a trader will find it impossible to communicate his desire to buy or sell In the 
marketplace. Without a clear understanding of the terms of an option contract, and his 
rights and responslblllties under that contract, a trader cannot hope to make the best 
use of options, nor will he be prepared for the very real risks of trading. 
CONTRACT SPECIFICATIONS 
Options are of two types. A call option ls the right to buy or take a long position in a 
given asset (typically a security, commodity, Index, or futures contract) at a fixed prtce 
on or before a specified date. A put option ls the right to sell or take a short position in 
a given asset. 
Note the difference between an option and a futures contract. A futures contract 
requires delivery at a fixed price. The buyer and seller of a futures contract both have 
obligations which they must meet. The seller must make delivery and the buyer must 
take delivery of the asset. The buyer of an option, however, has a choice. He can choose 
to take delivery (a call) or make delivery (a put). If the buyer of an option chooses to 
either make or take delivery, the seller of the option is obligated to take the other side. 
In option trading all rights lie with the buyer and all obligations with the seller. 
The asset to be bought or sold under the terms of the option ls the underly[ngasset 
or, more simply, the underlying. The exercise price, or strike price, ls the price at which 
the underlying will be delivered should the holder of an option choose to exercise his 
right to buy or sell. The date after which the optlon may no longer be exercised is the 
expiration date. 
I 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 
If an optlon ls purchased directly from a bank or other dealer, the quantlty of the 
underlying to be delivered, the exercise prtce, and the expiration date can au be tallored 
to meet the buyer's tndlvtdual requirements. If the option ls purchased on an exchange, 
the quantity of the underlying to be delivered, as well as the exercise price and 
expiration date, are predetermined by the exchange.1 
As an example of an exchange traded option, the buyer of a crude oll October 21 
call on the New York Mercantile Exchange has the right to take a long position In one 
October crude oil futures contract for 1,000 barrels of crude on (the underlying), at a 
price of $21 per barrel (the exercise price), on or before October expiration (the 
exptratlon date). The buyer of a General Electric March 80 put on the Chicago Board 
Options Exchange has the right to take a short position tn 100 shares of General Electric 
stock (the underlying) at a prtce of $80 per share (the exercise prtce), on or before March 
expiration (the expiration date). 
Since stock has no expiration date, the underlying asset for a stock option ls simply 
some number of shares In the underlying stock. In the case of futures options, however, 
the situation can be somewhat confusing, since a futures contract has a limited life span. 
Toe underlying asset for an option on a futures contract ts usually the futures month 
identical to the expiration month of the option. The underlying asset for a crude oil 
October 21 call on the NYMEX ts one October crude oll futures contract. The 
underlying asset for a Treasury Bond June 96 put on the Chicago Board of Trade ls one 
June Treaswy Bond futures contract 
Some futures exchanges also list serial options, whereby options wlth different 
expiration dates have Identical underlying futures contracts. When there ls no futures 
contract with the same expiration month as the option, the underlying contract for that 
option ts the nearest futures contract after the expiration of the option. For example, 
the underlying for a December Deutschemark option on the Chicago Mercantile 
Exchange ls one December Deutschemark futures contract With no October or 
November futures contract available, the underlying for an October or November 
Deutschemark option ls also one December futures contract December ts the nearest 
futures month after the expiration of October and November options. 
Expiration dates for exchange traded contracts are not unlf onn, but are set by each 
individual exchange. The expiration date for stock options 1n the United States ls usually 
the thJrd Saturday after the third Friday of the expiration month. F-or options on futures 
contracts, however, the expiration need not coincide with the delivery month spectfted 
in the option contract In some cases the exact expiration date for a futures option can 
Predate the dellveiy month of the underlying futures contract by several weeks. A crude 
oll option on the NYMEX will typically expire the first Saturday of the precedtng month 
~ tbat an October option vnll actually expire the flrst Saturday ln Sent?mho.. 1 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Language of Options 3 
Figure 1-1: Contract Specifications 
Crude 011• October 21 call t t t t Expiration Exercise 
Under1ylng Date Price Type ! ! ! l 
GE March 80 Put 
•1t this ts a futures option, the unde~~g Is a futures contract ra1her than the physical commodity. 
Figure 1-2: An Option Buy Order 
BUY C fp) GTC 
GE JN4 APA 31/1 \0 FEB MAY 10 
~ STOCK e JUN EXPX PAEM 
CON .u. OCT 
AUG Hl:N 
CXL SEP DEC 
FUS 
EX TIME 
FB/88 
TAKEN BY ANA ~ 
M/M ICCTI 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 
Figure 1-3: An Option Sell Order 
SELL p GTC 
25 OEX JAH ~ 
Ft:e MAY ~25 \{)i_ STOCK MAA JUN 1 'Ii 
JUL EXP)( ~4 00N OCT 
"' AUO @) 
SEP bee 
ALLS 
EX. TIME 
FB/BB 
TAKEN BY RNA ARM 
M/M /i!CCT# 
EXERCISE AND ASSIGNMENT 
A trader who owns a call or a put option has the rlght to exercise that option prior to 
its expiration date, thereby converting the option into a long underlying position, in the 
case of a can, or a short underlying position, in the case of a put. A trader who exercises 
a crude oil October 21 call has chosen to take a long position in one October crude oil 
futures contract at $21 per barrel. A trader who exercises a GE March 80 put has chosen 
to take a short position in I 00 shares of GE stock at $80 per share. Once an option is 
exercised it ceases to exist, just as if It had been aIJowed to expire unexercised. 
A trader who intends to exercise an option must submit an exercise notice to either 
the seller of the option, If purchased from a dealer, or to the guarantor of the option, if 
purchased on an exchange. When a valid exercise notice is subrnJtted, the seller of the 
option is assigned. Depending on the type of option, he will be required to take a long 
or short position in the underlyin~ contract at the sped.fled exercise price. 
In addition to its underlying contract exercise price expiration date, and type, an 
option is further identified by the condittdns of e:xerdse. An option Is either American, 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

r;~, u.ngirJIII of Options s 
figure 1-4: Thi Ex1rcl11 Ind A11lgn roe••• [_. I Cltarlng Houtt] 
Clearing firm notlfl11 tht 
ctearlng hOUII that tht 
buytr wtshll to 1x1rcl11. 
t 
[ Buylt'I CltlrtnQ Firm I 
t 
euyer notifl1es his clearing firm 
that he wishes to exercise his 
opt10n, thereby taking a long 
(cal0 or short (put) position 
In the under1ying instrument 
at the exercise price. 
' Holder of a Long 
Option Position 
(Buyer) 
Figure 1-5: An Exercise Notice 
DATE 
PUT EXERCISE 
NOTICE 
STRIKE PURCHASED 
QTY STK/COMM MONTH PRICE TOOAY 
\0 0~ rt\().[ 8a 1-1~1 
I I I 
I I I 
I I I I I I 
I I ] I I I • 1 
C1Hr1ng houM ChOOMI a 
.. 111r at random end notifl99 
lhl Mlltr'I Olllrfng ftrm tt,st 
the Mlltr t,u Mtn Mtlgned 
t 
\ IIIW• Clearing Firm \ 
* Seller it notified by his clear1ng 
firm that he has been assigned, 
and that he now hat a 9hof't 
(call) or long (put) position 
in the underlying instrument 
at the exercise price. 
' Holder of a Short 
Option Position 
(Seller) 
TIME STAMP 
Initials: 5\..\N 
Account# 
Firm# 
Broker# 
Per 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6 C/upttr I 
Figure 1-6: An Assignment Notice 
DATE ASSIGNMENT 
I I NOTICE 
mtlK! 
QTY ITI(JCOMII MONTH ltfllCE l'UT CAlL 
I \s ler~e o,\ 1 Cc+. I \8 I I ti RJN Initials: 
I 5 I ,-&n1s I Dec. I \CS 1~1 I Account# 
I I I I I I I Firm# 
I I I I I I I 
[ I I I I I I 
whereby the holder can exercise the option at any time prior to expiration, or European, 
whereby the holder can exercise the option only on expiration day.2 The great majority 
of exchange traded options throughout the world are American options, carrying with 
them the right of early exercise. Indeed, all U.S. exchange traded stock and futures 
options are American. 3 
As ln any competitive market, an option's price, or premium, ls detenntned by 
supply and demand. Buyers and sellers make competitive bids and offers in the 
marketplace. When a bid and offer coincide, a trade ls made. The premium paid for an 
option can be separated into two components, the tntrlnstc value and the time value. 
An option's intrinsic value ls the amount which would be credited to the option holder's 
account if he were to exercise the option and close out the position against the 
underlying contract at the current market price. For example, with gold trading at $435 
per ounce, the intrinsic value of a $400 call is $35. By exercising hls option, the holder 
of the $400 call can buy gold at $400 per ounce. If he sells gold at the market price of 
2. Since exchanges need time to process exercise and mtgnm11.nt notices, the holder of an exchange 
traded opUon must usually submit an exercise notice no later than the close of business on the day pr10t ·-,.._.., . • .... 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tht Ullgu,gt of Options 7 
$435 per ounce, $35 per ounce will be credlted to hJs account With a certain stock 
trading at $62, the lntrtnslc value of a $70 put ls $8. By exercising hls optJon, the holder 
of the put can sell the stock at $70 per share. U he then buys the stock back at the market 
prtce of $62, he wm show a total credJt of $8. 
A caJI Will only have Intrinsic value If Its exercise price ls less than the current 
market price of the underlying contract A put will only have Intrinsic value If Its exercise 
price ls greater than th.e current market prtce of the underlytng contract The amount 
of Intrinsic value Is the amount by which the call's exercise price ls less than the current 
underlying price, or the amount by which the put's exercise price ls greater than the 
cuITent underlying price. No option can have an intrinsic value less than zero. 
Usually an option's prtce In the marketplace will be greater than tts lntrtnslc value. 
The additional amount of premium beyond the intrinsic value whlch traders are willing 
to pay for an option ls the tlme value, sometlmes also referred to as the option's ttme 
premium or extrinsic value. As we shall see, market participants are w1lllng to pay this 
additional amount because of the protective characteristics afforded by an option over 
an outright long or short position In the underlying contract 
An option's premium ls always composed of precisely Its lnttinslc value and Its time 
value. If a $400 gold call is trading at $50 with gold at $435 per ounce, the time value 
of the call must be S 15, since the Intrinsic value Is $35. The two components must add 
up to the option's total premium of $50. If a $70 put on a stock Is trading for $9 with 
the stock at $62, the time value of the put must be $1, since the lntrtnslc value Is $8. 
The Intrinsic value and the time value must add up to the option's premium of $9. 
Even though an option's premium ls always composed of its Intrtnslc value and Its 
time value, It ls possible for one or both of these components to be zero. If the option 
has no Intrinsic value, Its prtce In the marketplace will consist solely of time value. If the 
option has no time value, Its price will consist solely of lntrtnslc value. In the latter case, 
we say that the option Is trading at parley. 
While an option's intrinsic value can never be less than zero, it ls possible for an 
option, if it ls European, to have a negative tlme value. (More about this when we look 
at early exercise In Chapter 12.) When this happens the option can trade for less than 
parity. Usually, however, an option's premium will reflect some non-negative amount 
of intrtnslc and time value. 
Any option which has a positive intrinsic value IS said to be ln-the-moneyby the 
amount of the Intrinsic value. With a stock at $44, a $40 call ls $4 in•the-money. Wlth 
Deutschemarks at 57.75, a 59 put is 1.25 In-the-money. An option which has no 
intrinsic value 1s said to be out-of the-money. The price of an out-of-the-money option 
consists solely of time value. In order to be In-the-money, a call (put) must have an 
exercise price lower (higher} than the cuJTent prtce of the underlying contract Note 
that if a call ls In-the-money, a put with the same exercise price and underlying contract 
must be out-of-the-money. Conversely, If the put ts in-the-money, a call wlth the same 
exercise prtce must be out-of-the-money. 
Anally, an option whose exercise prtce ls Identical to the current price of the 
underlying contract ls said to be at-the-money. Technically, such an option ls also 
out-of-the-money since It has no Intrinsic value. We make the dlstlnctlon between an 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Flgu.-. 1--=1': ,~n-_a_n_d_O_u-t-o-,--t-h_M_on-•-Y~O,...p..,.,tl,_.on_s_ ---
Current 
Underlying 
Prlct 
Lower Exercl ■t Prlc11 Higher Exercl1t Price• 
In-the-Money Cells Out-of-the-Money Calls 
Out-of-the-Money Puts In-the-Money Puts Chapttr I 
► 
at-the-money and out-of-the-money option because an at-the-money option has the 
greatest amount of time premium and ls usually traded very actlvely. 
If we want to be very precise, the exercise price of an option must be ldentlcal to 
the current price of the underlying contract for the optlon to be at-the-money. However, 
for exchange-traded options, the term ls commonly applied to the call and put whose 
exercise price is closest to the current price of the underlying contract With a stock at 
$74 and $5 between exercise prices ($65, $70, $75, $80, etc.), the $75 call and the 
$75 put would be considered the at-the-money options. These are the call and put 
options with exercise prices closest to the current price of the underlying contract. 
MARKET INTEGRITY 
An important consideration for every market participant is the integrity of the market. 
No trader wtll want to trade in a market where there ls a chance that the opposing trader 
wlll default on a contract. If a trader purchases an option, he wants to be certain that 
the seller will fulflll the terms of the contract if the option ls exercised. 
In order to guarantee that the integrity of the market will be maintained, each 
options exchange has establlshed a progression of responsiblllty for the fulflllment of the 
terms of an option. The primary responsiblllty falls to the Individual trader. If the seller 
of an option ls assigned, he must be prepared to take the required long or short position 
tn the underlying contract at the speclfled exercise price. In practical tenns, this means 
a trader must have access to capital at least equal to the option's intrinsic value. 
If an individual trader ls unable to fulfill the terms of the contract, the responsibility 
falls to the trader's clearing firm. A clearing firm ls a member flnn of the exchange which 
processes trades made by an lndlvldual, and which agrees to fulfill any financial 
obligation arising from those trades. No tndlvldual may trade on an exchange without 
first becoming associated wtth a clearing ftnn. 
If the cleartng firm cannot fulfill the terms of the contract, the final responsibility 
rests With the clearing house. Each exchange has established, or has become a member 
of, a deartng house which guarantees the Integrity of all trades. Once an option trade 
has been made, the connection between the buyer and seller Is severed, with the l 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

n,e Lang,rAG6 of Option.,; 
c1earlng house assuming the role or buyer from every seller, and s Iler to every buyer. 
If there were no central clearing house, the buyer of an opUon would be totally 
dependent on the good falth of the seller or the seller's clearing Orm to rum II the terms 
of the option In the event of exercise. Because the clearing house guarantees every trade, 
all buyers can be certain there will be an opposing party prepared to make or take 
delivery tf an option ts exercised. The clearing process Is shown In Figure 1-8. 
This system of guarantees has proven effectlve In ensuring the Integrity of options 
exchanges. While lndlvldual traders and clearing firms occasionally fall, a clearing house 
has never failed ln the United States. 
MARGIN REQUIREMENTS 
When a trader makes an opening trade on an exchange, the exchange may require the 
trader to deposit with the clearing house some amount of margin, or good faith capital.4 
Such deposits ensure that if the market moves adversely, the trader wlll still be able to 
fulfill any future financial obligations resulting from the trade. 
In lieu of cash, margin requirements may often be met by depositing government 
treasuiy instruments or, less commonly, commercial securities. Clearing flnns collect 
these margin requirements from their traders and forward the funds to the clearing 
Figure 1-8: The Clearing Process 
If reports from both clearing 
firms match, the trade 
becomes official. 
~I -------11 ►~jc1earing House I ....... ...-----, I 
! If the reports do not match, ! 
j they are retumed to each T 
. fi clearing firm, and from there Se Buyer's cleanng ,rm to the individual traders lier's clearing firm 
reports trade to for rectification. reports trade to 
7~~ -y-
jeuyer's Clearing Firm I jseller's Clearing Firm I 
t t 
Buyer reports trade Seller reports trade 
to his clearing firm. to his clearing firm. 
L ◄ ... ...---jTrading Floor l----1►~_J 
Buyer and seller agree 
on a contract, quantity, 
and price. 
4. Margin requirements for a prof9nal trader In an equity option market are referred to as a /Jdtrcut. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

/0 °"f}ttr I 
house. In theory, margin deposits at the clearing house sun belong to the lndJvtduaJ 
trader and, as such, any Interest or dividends accruing to the margtn deposit also belong, 
to the trader. Some dearlng firms, however, do not return thJs Interest to the trader 
clatmtng that It Is part of the fee paid by the trader for the clearing services of the membe; 
firm. This can occasionally become a sensltlve point between trader and clearing flnn, 
and should be settled before an lndlvfdual begins to trade. 
Margtn requirements for both optlons and underlying contracts are set by the 
clearing hOuse, using as guidelines the current value of the posltlon as well as the 
potential risk. Whlle an underlying position, panlcularly If It Is a futures contrac~ usually 
has a fixed margtn requirement, the margin for an optlon position can change over time 
since the margin for an optlon often depends on the amount by which It 1s In· or 
out-of-the-money. Posltlons consisting of a combtnatlon of optlons, or optlons and 
underlying Instruments, may have reduced margin requirements because the rtsk to one 
contract may be partlally offset by the value of another contract Additionally, traders 
who are exchange members may receive professional consideration in the fonn of 
reduced margin requirements. Every trader should become familiar with the margin 
requirements for the market In which he ls trading. Doing so will ensure that he has 
sufficient capital to lnltlate and hold posltlons as long as he deems necessary. 
SE1iLEMENT PROCEDURES 
New optlon traders are often confused because settlement procedures may vary from 
one exchange to another. Indeed, settlement procedures for an option and Its underlying 
contract may differ. Two methods are commonly used to settle exchange-traded 
contracts-stock-type settlement and futures-type settlement. 
Suppose a trader buys 100 shares of a $50 stock. The value of the stock ls $5,000, 
and the buyer ls reqlllred to pay the seller the full amount. If the stock rises to $60 per 
share, the owner of the stock Will show a profit of $10 per share, or a total profit of 
$1,000. Even so, he won't be able to actually spend this $1,000 profit until he fonnally 
liquidates the position by selllng his I 00 shares at $60 per share. This type of settlement 
procedure, where purchase requires full and Immediate payment, and where profits or 
losses are unrealized until the position ls llquJdated, ts known as stock-type settlement. 
In contrast to stock-type settlement, futures-type settlement requires no Initial cash 
payment from the buyer to the seller. Moreover, all profits or losses are immediately 
realized, even If the position ls not liquidated. If a trader buys a gold futures contract 
covertng l 00 ounces of gold for $450 per ounce, the full value of the contract ls 
$45,000. The buyer, however, Is not required to pay the seller the full $45,000 value 
of the contract. The buyer does not have to pay any money at all. He ls only required to 
~eposlt with the clearing house some amount of good-faith margin. At the end of each radlng day both the buyer and the seller wtll lmmedlately realize any profits or losses 
resulting from movement In the price of the gold futures contract. If gold rises from $450 
:1~:~per ounce, $2,000 ($20 x 100) will be credited to the buyer's account, and he 
course 1~ :mediate use of these funds even If he does not liquidate the position. Of 
' e price of gold drops to $430 per ounce, he wlll realize an immediate loss 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

II 
of $2,000. If he does not have sumclent funds In his account to cover this los,, thP. 
cteanng house will Issue a vaf1atfon call. 
There Is an Important dlstlnctlon between a margin call and a varlatlon call. A 
margin call Is Issued by the clearing house to ensure that a trader can fulflll future 
financial obligations should the market move against him. Margin calls can be met wttll 
runds which, even though deposited at the clearing house, stllJ belong to the trader and 
consequently can earn Interest for the trader. A vartatlon call ls Issued In order to rulftll 
current financial obligations In the form of realized losses. A varlatlon call must be met 
with a cash payment which Is Immediately deducted from a trader's account Jf a trader 
has deposited securities With the clearing house as margin and receives a variation call, 
he must either deposit the additional variation amount In cash, or the clearing house 
will sell the securities In his account to generate enough cash to meet the vartatlon call. 
If the remaining securities and cash In the account Is not sufficient to meet the current 
margl.n requirements, the trader may be forced to liquidate his position. 
We make this very important distinction between stock-and futures-type settle­
ment because some options are settled like stock and some options are settled like 
futures. It ls important for a trader to know which he ls trading. Currently all 
exchange-traded options in the United States, whether options on stock, futures, 
indices, or foreign currencies, are settled like stock. Options must be paid for lmmedl· 
ately and In full, and profits or losses are unrealized until the position ls liquidated. In 
stock option markets this ls both logtcal and conslsten~ since both the underlying 
contract and options on that contract are settled using identical procedures. However, 
on U.S. futures options markets, the underlying contract ls settled one way (futures-type 
settlement) while the options are settled ln a different way (stock-type settlement). This 
can sometimes cause problems when a trader has bought or sold an option to hedge a 
futures position. Even If the profits from the option position exactly offset the losses from 
the futures position, the profits from the option position, because the options are settled 
like stock, are only paper profits. On the other hand, the losses from the futures position 
will require an immediate cash outlay to cover a variation call. If a trader is unaware of 
the different settlement procedures, he can occasionally find himself with unexpected 
cash flow problems. 
The settlement situation on many exchanges outside the U.S. has been simplified 
by making option and underlying settlement procedures 'identical. If the underlying is 
subject to stock-type settlement, then so are the options on the underlying. H the 
underlying ls subject to futures-type settlement, then so are the options. Under this 
method a trader ls unlikely to get a surprise variation call on a position which he thinks 
Is well hedged. 
Before concluding this chapter, It wtll be useful to define the terms long and short 
as they are used In option trading versus their use In trading an underlying contract In 
a long underlying position a trader will profit If prices rise and lose If prices fall. In a short 
underlying position a trader will profit if prices fall and lose If prices rise. There Is a 
tendency to carry this tenntnology over into the option market by referring to any 
position which will profit from a rise tn the price of the underlying contract as a long 
position, and any position which will profit from a fall In price as a short position. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12 C/zdpte, I 
More generally, however, the terms Jong and short refer to the purchase or sale 0 a contract, and this ls the sense ln which we apply these terms to option trading. A trader 
who has purchased an option is long the option, and a trader who has sold the opuon 
ls short. There is no confusion when we refer to a Jong call position because the trader 
who ls long a call also has a long market position. Calls will, in theory, rise in value U 
the underlying market rises. But a long put position Js a short market position. A trader 
who has purchased a put wants the underlying market to decline because a put Will 
theoretically increase in value as the market declines. Throughout the text, whenever 
there ls the posslblllty of confusion, an attempt wlll be made to distinguish between a 
long or short market position versus a long or short option posltlon. 