Models and the Real World 
The accuracy of values generated by a theoretical pricing model rests on two points: the 
accuracy of the assumptions upon which the model ls based, and the accuracy of the 
Inputs lnto the model. Thus far, we have tended to focus on the second area, the 
accuracy of the Inputs. Through attention to the sensitivities of an option position ( delta, 
gamma, theta, vega, and rho), a trader can Identify those Inputs which represent the 
greatest rtsk to hls position, and thereby prepare to take protective action If thin~ ~ 
wrong. While all the Inputs Into the model represent a risk to the trader, we have placed 
special emphasis on volatility, since It ls the one Input which cannot be directly observed 
in the marketplace. 
However, the active option trader cannot afford to Ignore the first area, the 
possibility that the assumptions which form the foundation of the model are themselves 
inaccurate or unreallstlc. Some of these assumptions pertain to the way business ts 
transacted in the marketplace, while others pertain to the mathematics of option pricing. 
To begin, we might list the most Important assumptions built into a traditional 
pricing model: t 
1. Markets are frictionless 
a. The underlying contract can be freely bought or sold, without restriction 
b. There are no tax consequences associated with trading 
c. Everyone can borrow and lend money freely, and one interest rate applies 
to all transactions 
d. There are no transaction costs 
2. Interest rates are constant over the life of an option 
3. Volatility ls constant over the life of an option 
4. Trading is continuous with no gaps In the price changes of an underlying 
instrument 
5. Volatility ls Independent of the price of the underlying contract 
6. Over short periods of time the percent price changes In an underlying contract 
are normally distributed, resulting In a lognormal distribution of underlying 
prices at expiration ---1. By "tradttlonal pricing model" we mean those that are most commonly used: the Black-Scholes model 
and tts variations, the Cox·R~•Rubenstetn model, or the Whaley model 
385 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

386 Cfyp/er II 
The reader may already have an opinion about the accuracy of these assumptJons, but 
let's consider them one by one. 
MARKETS ARE FRICl'IONLESS 
In Chapter 5 we came to the obvious conclusion that markets are not frtctlonless. The 
underlying contract cannot always be freely bought or sold; there are sometimes tax 
consequences; a trader cannot always borrow and lend money freely, nor at the same 
rate; there are always transaction costs. 
In the tuwres markets the underlying cannot always be freely bought or sold 
because exchanges sometimes set dally price limits beyond which a futures contract 
may not trade. When that limit ls reached, trading ls halted until the market comes off 
Its limit If It doesn't come off llmlt, trading does not resume untll the next business day. 
The consequences of a locked futures market are usually not severe, and there are 
several ways for a trader to circumvent the problem. Instead of trading In the tuwres 
market, a trader might be able to trade In the cash market Or the trader might be able 
to trade the underlying market by trading a futures spread where one side of the spread 
ls not locked. f-or example, suppose a trader wants to buy a June futures contract whlch 
ls up limit If a March futures contract ls still trading because It Is not up Its Umlt, the 
trader can buy a June/March spread (buy June, sell March}, and then go back Into the 
market and buy the March futures contract This leaves him long a June futures 
contract, which ls what he wanted. Anally, If the underlying futures market ls locked, 
but the option market Is not locked, a trader can trade synthetic long or short futures 
contracts. 
In the stock market, there may be prohibitions against the sale of stock not actually 
owned. Or If short sales are allowed, there may be restrictions on when such sales can 
be made. If a trader cannot freely sell stock, put prices become Inflated compared to call 
prices, and all the conversions and reversals appear to be mlsprtced with respect to their 
theoretical values. If short sales are not freely permitted, many stock option traders try 
to carry some long stock so they will always be ln a position to sell stock lf the need 
arises. Also, we saw ln Chapter 5 In the discussion of time spreads, and In Chapter 12 
ln the discussion of boxes, that tender offers for a stock can distort the value of these 
positions. In the case of time spreads, traders may be forced to exercise call options with 
some time value remaining because no stock can be borrowed to carry a short position. 
A box may be trading at greater than lts theoretical value lf a partial tender offer ls made 
and early exercise ls a posslblllty. 
Whlle there are occasionally tax considerations, for most market participants these 
are usually minor. When considering a strategy, a trader ls unlikely to ask himself, "If 
this trade makes or loses money, what wlll be the tax consequences?" Nor should most 
traders ask such a question. Differences In tax consequences, or changing tax conse­
quences, rarely make one strategy better than another. 2 
2. This 1s not to say that tax consequences are al~ lnslgn!Ocant Tax conslderatlons can sometimes play 
a role In portfolio manll!Jllenl They can also play a role In stock opUOll strategtes involving dlvtdendsi 
when the dtvtdends are subject to dtlerent tax rules than the pins or I~ fl'om stock or options. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ModtLT ind tht Rtal World 387 
The assumptlon that a trader can always borrow or lend money freely ts a more 
serious weakness In prtdng models. Even If a trader has sufficient funds to lnltlate a 
trade, he may find at some later date that he Is required to come up with addltlonal 
funds ln the fonn of Increased margin requirements. 3 rr money were freely available 
margin would never be a problem. A trader could always borrow marg1n money and 
deposit the money with the clearing house. Since the borrowing and lendJng rate are 
assumed to be the same, and since the clearing house 1n theory pays Interest on the 
margin deposit, there would never be a problem obtalnlng margin money, nor would 
there ever be a cost associated It. 
In the real world traders do not have unllmlted borrowing capacity. If a trader 
cannot meet a margin requirement he may be forced to liquidate a posttlon prior to 
expiration. Slnce all models, even those which allow for early exercise, asrume that a 
trader will always have the choice of holding a position to explratlon, the lnablllty to 
meet margin requirements, and therefore maintain the position, can make the values 
generated by the theoretical pricing model less reliable. Expertenced traders learn to 
consider the risk of a position not only from the standpoint of how much the position 
might lose If thin~ go wrong, but how much margin might be required to maintain the 
position over the life of the options. A trader should always have sufficient margin 
money available to meet this latter requirement 
Even If a trader had unlimited borrowtng capacity, the fact that for most traders 
borrowing and lending rates are not the same can also cause problems wlth strategles 
based on model generated values. A trader who borrows margin money at one rate will 
almost certainly receive a lower rate when he deposits this money with the clearing 
house. The difference between these rates, which will result In a loss to the trader, Is 
something of which the model Is unaware. And the greater the difference between 
borrowing and lending rates, the less reliable will be the values generated by the model. 
The most serious flaw ln the frtctlonless markets hypothesis Is the assumption that 
there are no transactlon costs. While a strategy might or mlght not be affected by tax or 
nterest rate considerations, there are always transaction costs. These costs can come In 
the fonn of brokerage fees, clearing fees, or an exchange membership. For many market 
participants, transactlon costs may be so great that a strategy which looks sensible based 
on model-generated values may not be worth doing when transaction costs are also 
taken Into conslderatlon. Moreover, transaction costs can accrue not only when the 
strategy Is Initiated or liquidated, but also every tlme an adjustment Is made. Ha strategy 
will require many adjustments because It has a high gamma and the trader Intends to 
stay delta neutral, the transactlon costs can have an especially great Impact on model· 
generated values. 
3. The possblllty that a trader In a futures opUon market may Ibo have to come up wtth add!tlonal 
vadatton money, as opposed to margin money, sub2quent to embltsbJng .a optloll posltton 1s 
Incorporated Into most models. ThJs ls why a conversion or reversal In a futures option market may not 
be delta neutral. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

388 C/up(tr 1, 
INTEREST RATES ARE CONSTANT 
OVER THE LIFE OF AN OPflON 
The tnterest rate component assumed In a theoretical prlclng model Is the rtskJess rate 
over the life of an option. Any credits or debits associated with an optlon strategy wm 
be subject to an Interest rate Identical to the least risky rate corresponding to the tenn 
of the optlon. In most markets the least risky rate ls the rate associated with govemmerx 
Issued securltles. A trader In a U.S. option market who sells straddles consisting of 
three-month calls and puts Is assumed by the model to have Invested the resuJtlng credlt 
In three-month government treasury bllls. If both the option position and the treaSUry 
bllls are held to expiration, this effectively locks ln one interest rate (that associated with 
three-month treasury bills) over the life of the options. 
In reality few traders actually take the proceeds from an optlon trade and Invest It 
tn government securttles. More often, a trader will put the proceeds In a trading 
account, where it Is subject to a variable Interest rate. Moreover, whUe a trader can lend 
money to the government by purchasing government secur1tles, he cannot do the 
reverse and borrow money from the government at the same rate. If he wants to borrow, 
he may have to go to a bank where the cost of borrowing could be subject to a vartable 
Interest rate. Given the realities of the marketplace, most traders' transactJons are not 
subject to a fixed and rtskless rate, as the model assumes, but to a constantly changing 
Interest rate. Is this a cause for worry? 
While a changing Interest rate will cause the value of a trader's option posltJon to 
change, Interest rates usually do not change In a way which will have a s1gnlflcant 
Impact on an option's value, at least In the shon run. Since the effect of changing Interest 
rates ls a function of time to expiration, and since most listed options have terms of less 
than nine months, Interest rates would have to change violently to have an Impact on 
any but the most deeply In-the-money options. Changing Interest rates become even less 
of a concern when one considers how much more sensitive option values are to changes 
In the price of the underlying Instrument or to changes In volatility. 
This Is not to say that a trader should completely Ignore the possibility of changing 
Interest rates. As we saw In Chapter 81 changing Interest rates can have an Impact on 
time spreads In the stock option market But even then, Interest rates would have to 
change several percentage points over a short period of time to have a slgnlflcant Impact 
(see Figure 8·15). 
With the lntroducUon of long-term equity options, known as LEAPS, the conse­
quences of changing Interest rates may well become more of a concern. Using the 
Black-Scholes model, we can see In Figure 18· 1 that the values of two-year stock options 
changes significantly with only small changes In Interest rates (delta values are In 
parentheses). Note particularly how quickly the 120 put drops below Its parity value of 
20.00. In a high Interest rate environment, a long-term In-the-money American put will 
quickly become an early exercise candidate. Everyone will prefer to exercise the put In 
order to earn a high rate of Interest on the proceeds from the sale of the stock. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 18-1 
Stock price = 100; Time to expiration = 2 years; Volatility = 20%; 
ln .... tRate: 2% 4% 6% 
80call 25.48 (86) 27.90 (89) 30.34 (91) 
80put 2.34 (-14) 1.75(-11) 1.29 (-9) 
100 call 13.10 (61} 15.08 (66) 17.20 (71) 
100 put 9.17 (-39) 7.39 (-34) 5.89 (-29) 
120 can 5.95 (36) 7.22 (41) 9.00 (47) 
120 put 21.24 (-64) 18.00 (-59) 15.10 (-63) Dividend =0 
8% 10% 
32.77 (93) 35.17 (95) 
.94 (-7) .67 (-5) 
19.42 (76) 21.72 (80) 
4.63 (-24) 3.59 (-20) 
10.28 (52) 12.05 (58) 
12.54 (-48) 10.29 (-42) 12% 14% 
37.54 (96) 39.87 (97) 
.47 (-4) .33 (-3} 
24.09 (84) 26.50 (87) 
2.75 (-16) 2.08 (-13) 
13.96 (64) 16.00 (69) 
8.35 (-36) 6.70 (-31) f ,. 
e;--a s 
~ 
~ 
~ -
~ 
~ Q:; 
~ 
~ 
'<:) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

390 
VOLATILITY IS CONSTANT 
OVER THE LIFE OF THE OPl'ION 
When a trader feeds a volatlllty lnto a theoretical pricing model, he ls 
the magnltude of prlce changes which will occur over the llfe of the 0te1Ung the 
characteristics of a nonnal dlstrtbutlon, the model uses the volaUUty :on. C~ij 
certain number or one, two, three, or more standard devlatlon price Chan ~~late~ 
the model assumes that occurrences or each particular magnitude !~· Mo~ 
distributed over the llfe of the option. Two standard deviation Price Chan be ~ 
evenly distributed among the one standard deviation price changes· thr &es '#illl ~ 
deviation price changes will be evenly distributed among the one a~d ~ s~ 
deviation price changes; and so on. Stan~ 
Look at Figures 18-2a and 18·2b, dally bar charts or an underlytng co 
the llf e of a certain option. Both bar charts exhibit exactly the same vo1awt~ct 0Ver 
pertod ln question, 16.7%. Yet lt Is obvious that the order In which the vo1a:i 0Ver ~ 
ls completely different In Figure 18•2a all the large price changes occur durtng % OCC1.J!l 
part of the option's llfe, whlle ln Figure 18·2b all the large price changes occ eeany 
the latter part of the option's life. This Is often how price changes actually oc! ~ll!lng 
real world, rather than the even distribution which the model assumes A ll'e 
typically encounters periods of high volatlllty where all the two and ~ sta~der 
deviation price changes seem to be bunched together. Or he encounters periods of~ 
volatility where all the one standard deviation price changes seem to be bunch~ 
together. A graph of historical volatlllty Is never a straight line. (For a good example Of 
this, the reader should look again at Figure 14-2.) But the theoretlcal pricing modd 
cannot differentiate between our two volatility scenarios. The model simply sees a 
volatility of 16.7% and assumes that all prtce changes are evenly distributed, and 
consistent wlth this volatility, over the life of the option. 
Suppose a trader were to buy a l 05 straddle and assumed, correctly, a volatility of 
16.7%. If he bought and sold underlying contracts In order to remain delta neutral over 
the life of the option, the model tells him, because It assumes a constant volatility of 
16.7%, that the profit or loss to the trader will be Identical In either of our scenartos. ls 
this likely to be the case? 
Notice that the underlying market Is moving through l 05 both at the be~nntng 
and at the end of the options' life. We can therefore consider the 105 call and put as 
being at-the-money during these periods. Since at-the-money options have the highest 
gamma, the 105 straddle will be a relatively high gamma position both early and late In 
the spread's life. Short-term at-the-money options always have greater gammas than 
long-term at-the-money options, so any Increase In volatility which occurs during the 
latter part of the option's life, as It does In Figure 18·2b, wlll have a much greate!I~~~ 
on the position than volatility which occurs during the early part of the option 51 ' 
It does In Figure l 8-2a. uency of 
Because the gamma of a position determines both the magnitude and freq d r the 
the adjustment process, the 105 straddle will be much more valuable: ~ the 
movement represented In Figure 18-2b. The movement back and forth t u 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

/,/ode~ and tht Rtal World 391 
as i; 0 .,.. ll) 
.,.. 0 8 .,.. ~ .,.. 
T'" 
! ::, 
t7I ii: 
-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

392 
0 
'P'" 
'P'" It) 
0 ,... 0 
0 ,... {Jypter/1 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-
Mod~ls and tht Rt~/ World 393 
eierclse prtce late In the option's Ufe wm require larger and larger adjustments, each of 
which ts favorable to the holder of the I 05 straddle. The scenario In Agure 18-2a wtH 
also require adjustments . But the adjustments now will be relatlvely small because the 
movement In the underlying contract ls much less dramatic. 
Through experience most traders have come to the conclusion that the order In 
which volatility occurs does matter. It matters especially for at-the-money options, 
because they have the greatest gammas. Any period of high volatlUtywhlch occurs near 
expiration will have a greater Impact on an at-the-money option than the same hJgh 
volatility which occurs when the option has a great deal of time remaining to expiration. 
Consequently, even If one knows the actual volatility over the life of an option, a model 
wm tend to undervalue at-the-money options In a rtslng volatility market, and overvalue 
at-the-money options In a falling volatility market 
We have only considered one alternative volatility scenario, where volatility ts 
either Increasing or decreasing. But there are an Infinite number of paths which volatility 
might follow over the llfe of an option. A trader might even assume that volatility ls Itself 
random, and that predicting volatility with any degree of accuracy Is not possible. 
Models which assume stochastic volattlltydo exist and might, under some condltlons, 
be more suitable than a traditional pricing model. At the same time, such models add 
another dimension of complexity to a trader's llfe, and for this reason are not widely 
used.4 
Some contracts, by their very nature, are known to change their volatility charac­
teristics over time. Interest rate products, In particular, fall Into this category. As a bond 
approaches maturity, the price of the bond moves inexorably towards par. At maturity, 
regardless of Interest rates, the bond will have a fixed and known value. Clearly, one 
cannot assume that the price of the bond follows a random walk through time. Even If 
one assumes that Interest rates move randomly, and that the volatlllty of Interest rates 
ls constant, Interest rate Instruments will change their volatlllty over time because 
Instruments of different maturities have different sensltlvltles to changes In Interest 
rates. If we take Into consideration the fact that Interest rates also vary for different 
maturities, a traditional Black-Scholes type model ls obviously Inadequate for the 
evaluation of such products. This has led to the development of special models to 
evaluate Interest rate lnstruments .5 
4. f-or a more detailed discussion see: 
Hull, John and WhJte, Alan, "The Pricing of Options wtth StodwtJc VolatilJUes," ]oumll of Fln3.nce, 
Vol 42, No. 2,June 1987, pages 281-300. 
Scott, Lou.b D., "Option Prtdngwben Variance Cbanws Randomly: Theory, EsUmation, and Applicat1on," 
Jourrw of Fwnce and CmntlWIVe An.1/ysls, No. 22, December 1987, pages 419-438. 
WJggl.ns, J.B., "Option Values under StochasUc VolatllJty: Theory and Emplrlcal Results," JouTTIJI of 
Ftrwicu/Economtcs, No. 19, December 1987, ~ 351-372. 
5. See for example: 
Ho, Thomas, T.S. Y. and Lee, Saog•Bin, "Term Structure Movements and the Pricing of Interest Rate 
Cont1n6'nt Claims," Journal o/Ftnance, Vol. 41, No. 5, December 1986, pages 1011-1029. 
H~th, David; Janow, Robert; and Morton, Andrew, "Bond Pricing and the Tenn Structure of Interest 
Rates: A New Methodology," Econometrfa, Vol. 60, 1992, pages 77-105. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

394 l7Jlp(tr II 
TRADING IS CONTINUOUS 
A theoretldan trying to develop a realistic price distribution for use In a cheoretlQJ 
pricing model might first ask how the prices of an underlying contract change over tunt. 
Perhaps not all contracts change prices in the same way. Pr1ce changes mJght, for 
example, follow a diffusion process lsee Agure 18-3). In a diffusion process there are 
smooth and continuous changes from one price to the next, wtth no gaps between 
consecutive prices. Moreover, the longer the period of tlme between pr1ce readJn~, ~ 
greater the dispersion In prices. An example of a typical diffusion process might be tht 
temperature readln~ in a specific location. While the temperature can change very 
quickly, there wlll never be any gaps. If the temperature at one moment ls l 5° but at a 
later tlme Is 18°1 then at some Intermediate tlme, even If only very br1effy, the 
temperature must have also been 16° and l 7°. And there ls llkely to be a greater 
temperature change over six weeks than over six days. 
Prices might also follow a Jump process. In a strict jump process, the pr1ce of a 
contract remains constant for a period of tlme, then Instantaneously jumps to a new 
price, where It again remains constant for some period of time. The way in which central 
banks set interest rates ls typical of a jump process. In the United States, when the 
Federal Reserve sets the discount rate, It remaJns there untll It Is fixed at a new rate. It 
remains at this new rate untll the Federal Reserve again announces a change In the 
discount rate. A jump process Is a combination of fixed prices and Instantaneous jumps. 
Most theoretical pr1clng models assume that trading in the underlying contract 
follows a diffusion process. Trading ls assumed to be contlnuous, proceeding 24 hours 
per day, seven days per week, without lntelTllptlon. There can be no gaps In the prtce 
of the underlying contract If a contract trades at 46.05, and at some later tlme trades 
at 46.08, then at some Intermediate tlme It must have also traded, even If only brtefly, 
at 46.06 and 46.07. If one were to draw a graph of price changes under a diffusion 
process, one would never llft the pencil from the paper. 
A diffusion process Is a convenient, but dearly Inexact, approximation of how 
prices change In the real world. Exchange-traded contracts cannot follow a pure 
diffusion process because exchanges are not open 24 hours per day. At the end of the 
trading day a contract often closes at one price, and then opens the next day at a different 
price. This causes a price gap, something which a diffusion process does not permit 
Even during normal trading hours prices may not follow a diffusion process. If major 
news hits the market, the Impact can be almost instantaneous, causing prices to gap up 
or down. 
If a theoretical pricing model makes the assumption that prices follow a diffusion 
process, when In fact they don't, how ls this likely to affect values generated by the 
model? Consider a situation where an underlying futures contract ls trading at 100 and 
a trader feels that Implied volatility In the option market Is much too high. Because all 
options are overpriced, the trader decides to sell the 100 straddle. Unfortunately, 
Immediately after he sells the straddle the market gaps up to 105 How will the gap 
affect the trader's Position? • 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mod ~ and the Rtal World 395 
~ 
L -? I Q. 
Q. 
E :::, .., 
:a 8 
~ [~_ 
8 iii 
~ 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

396 
A trader who Is short straddles does not want to see a g:.ip In the market. Th~ far 
that a gap has occurred will hurt the trader, but will It cause him only minor pain, 
will It destroy him? If the options are relatively long-term, say nine months, the gp 1 
the underlying price Is unlikely to be the end of the world. After all, with nine mo 
remaining to expiration the underlying market could easily fall back to Joo. And wlllle 
the gap has clearly hurt the trader, It Is probably not disastrous.a But If the gap o cu 
with only a very short tlme remaining to expiration, say one day, the trader Js now Jn a 
situation where he might very well be ruined. With only one day to explratlon, there IJ 
simply not enough time for the market to retrace Its movement. Toe 1 oo calls which 
the trader sold as part of his short straddle will act like shon futures contracts. While 
the spread began approximately delta neutral, after the gap the trader Will find himself 
naked short deeply In-the-money calls, each with a delta of 100, In a market which has 
just made a giant leap upward. Figure 18-4 shows how prices might change with nine 
months versus one day remaining to expiration. 
With nine months remaining to expiration the I 00 straddle Increased In value by 
approximately 7% (l 4.04/13.18 = 1.07). But with one day remaining to expiration the 
100 straddle Increased in value by 495% (5.00/.84 = 5.95). The gap was painful with 
nine months to expiration, but it was devastating with one day to expiration. 
Toe reason that the gap caused such a dramatic change In the one-day straddle was 
that the delta of the 100 straddle was much more sensitive to a change In the prtce of 
the underlying contract. With nine months to expiration the 100 call and put have a 
gamma of only 2.2. But with one day to expiration they have a gamma of 38.1. In the 
latter situation, with such a high negative gamma, any movement will undoubtedly be 
very painful. The trader could reduce some of the damage If he were able to adjUSt the 
position by purchasing futures as the market moved upward. But a gap Is an Instanta­
neous move; there is no opportunity to adjust. The very high gamma, combined with 
an inability to make any adjustment, Is what makes the gap so devastating. 
Options have the unique characteristic of automatically, and continuously, rehedg­
ing themselves by changing their deltas as the price of the underlying contract changes. 
It is this characteristic which buyers of options are paying for. A trader who uses a 
theoretical pricing model attempts to take advantage of a mlspriced option by estab-
Figure 18-4 
Implied Volatility= 20%; Interest Rate= 6% 
100 call price 
100 put price 
100 straddle price 9 month• to expiration 
Future, Future, 
at 100 at 105 
6.59 9.41 
6.59 4,63 
13.18 14.04 1 day to expiration 
FuturN FuturN 
at100 at105 
.42 5.00 
.42 0 
.84 5.00 
8. R>r simplicity, we ~ume that there Is no change In JmplJed volatlllty after the gap. Admittedly , tllfs ~ 
unllkely to be the case. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Moctels and the Real World J()J 
llshtng a delta neutral hedge against the underlying, and then manually performing the 
rehedging process himself over the life of the opUon. This was the basis for the examples 
tn Chapter 5. If a model assumes, as most do, that prices follow a diffusion process, the 
model assumes that one can continuously maintain a delta neutral hedge. But when the 
market gaps, the assumptions on which the model Is based are violated. Consequently, 
the values generated by the model are rendered Invalid. This problem extends to any 
application which attempts to replicate option characteristics through a continuous 
rehedging In the underlying market. The proponents of portfolio Insurance suffered their 
greatest setbacks on October 19 and 20, 1987, when the market made several large gap 
moves. Because of the gaps, the portfolio insurers were unable to make continuous delta 
adjustments to their positions. As a consequence, they found that the cost of protection 
offered by portfolio insurance was much greater than they had ever expected. 
Since traditional pricing models make an unrealistic assumption about how prices 
change, perhaps a model which makes a more realistic assumption would yield more 
accurate theoretical values. Theoreticians tend to agree that underlying contracts In 
most markets follow a combination of both a diffusion process and a jump process. Most 
of the time prices change smoothly and continuously, with no gaps. Eveiy now and 
then, however, a gap will occur, Instantaneously sending the price to a new level. From 
there prices will again follow a smooth diffusion process until another gap occurs. If one 
could generate a underlying price dlstrlbutJon which resulted from this Jump-diffusion 
process, and feed this dlstrlbutJon into a theoretical pricing model, the model should 
give more accurate values. 
A vartatlon of the Black-Scholes model which assumes that the underlying contract 
follows a jump-diffusion process has In fact been developed. If used correctly, this 
jump-diffus(on model does give values which are probably more accurate than tradi­
tional Black-Scholes values. 7 Unfortunately, the model ls considerably more complex 
mathematically than the traditional Black-Scholes model. Moreover, in addition to the 
five customary inputs, the model also requires two new Inputs: the average size of a 
jump in the underlying market, and the frequency with which such jumps are likely to 
occur. Unless the user can accurately estimate these new inputs, the values generated 
by a jump-diffusion model may be no better, and might be worse, than those generated 
by a traditional model. Most traders take the view that whatever weaknesses are 
encountered In a traditional model can be best offset through intelligent decision making 
based on actual trading experience, rather than through the use of a more complex 
jump-diffusion model. 
Since a gap in the market will have its greatest effect on a high gamma option, and 
since at-the-money options dose to expiration have the highest gamma, It ls these 
options which are likely to be misprtced by a traditional theoretical pricing model with 
its continuous diffusion process. The closer one gets to expiration, the more suspect 
7. Information on the jump-diffusion model can be found 1n most advanced texts on option theory. fur 
additional Jnformatton see: 
Merton, Robert, "Option Plidng when Underlytng Stock Returns are OJscontlnous, • Joumdl of 
FtnancW Economics, Volume 3, March 1976, ~ 125-144. 
Beckers, Stan, "A Note on fsimatlng the Paramete~ 1n the Jump-DUfustan Model ol Stock Returm, • 
Journal of Ftna.ndal and Quanttut!Vt Afli/ysls, March 1981, pages 127-140. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

398 
model•generated values become. Consequently, traders pay Jess and less attentJon tD 
model•generated values as exptratlon approaches. It ls common practlce among floor 
traders on optlon exchanges co take wtth them to the trading floor sheeU wtth 
theoretical values to enable them to make markets which are consistent wtth a 
theoreUcal pricing model. But as explratlon approaches traders are more lfkety to dlSWd 
their sheets because the values on the sheets become less reliable. With only one or two 
days to expiration, most traders simply make decisions based on expertence and 
lntultlon. WhJle this ls perhaps unscientific, It someumes makes better sense than 
trading from model•generated values when the model ls known to be Incorrect. 
As a result of the gaps which occur ln the real world, both a trader's experience 
and empirical evidence seem to Indicate that a traditional model, with Its buUt·tn 
diffusion assumptlon, tends to undemlue at-the-money opUons as explraUon ap­
proaches. From a risk standpoint, this means that It can be very dangerous to sell a large 
number of at-the-money options close to expiration, since any gap In the undertytng 
market can have devastating results. New traders, In particular, are advtsed to avoid 
such posltlons. No risk manager will appreciate even experienced traders being short 
large numbers of at•the-money options as expiration approaches. 
Expiration Straddles 
If It Is dangerous to sell at-the-money options going Into expiration, perhaps there u 
some sense In taklng the opposite position by purchasing at-the-money optJons as 
expiration approaches. This may seem to contradict conventional option wtsdom, 
which contends that a trader should sell at-the-money options In order to take advantage 
of the rapid tlme decay associated with such optlons. What traders tend to forget lS that 
there Is always a tradeoff between risk and reward. If one sells at-the-money options, 
the reward may be an accelerated profit If the market doesn't move (high positive theta). 
But the risk Is an Increased loss If the market does move (high negaUve gamma). Because 
the model does not know about the possibility of a gap In the underly\ng market, the 
risk ls often greater than the reward. If one sells at-the-money options, the losses from 
an occasional gap will more than offset the profits resultlng from Increased time decay. 
An experienced trader will therefore tend to do the opposite of conventional wlsdom. 
If conditions are rtght, he will tend to buy at-the-money options close to explratlon. 
This Is not to suggest that every time expiration approaches, a trader should run 
out and buy at-the-money optlons. As with any strategy, conditions must make the 
strategy attractive. But because so many traders are Intent on selllng time premium as 
expiration approaches, It Is often possible to find cheap at•the-money options. F-or 
example, suppose that with three days remaining to expiration the Black-Scholes model 
generates a value for an at-the-money call of .50, but that It ls priced at .45. What can 
we say about this call? While we may not know the exact value, we can certainly say 
that the call ls likely to be worth more than .50, since there Is always the posslblllty of 
a gap In the market. Clearly, If the call ls trading at .45, but has a value ln excess of .50, 
It must be a good buy. 
As with any strategy based on volatility, the trader who buys these calls wm try to 
establish a delta neutral poslUon. Because of the synthetic relationship, lf the calls are 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Modtls ind the Real World 399 
undel1)rtced the puts at the same exercise price will also be underprlced. A logical 
strategy might be the purchase of at-the-money straddles. This enables a trader to buy 
both underprtced calls and underprtced puts, and to profit If the underlylng market gaps 
either up or down. 
In theory all volatlllty strategies, Including an expiration straddle, ought to be 
periodically adjusted In order to remain delta neutral. However, with little time 
remaining to expiration the model Is not only unreliable with respect to theoretical 
values, tt ls also unreliable with respect to deltas. Because It Is Impossible to say what 
the right delta ls, lt ls also Impossible to say what the correct adjustment Is. For this 
reason, traders who Initiate expiration straddles often forget about trying to adjust, and 
simply slt on the position to expiration. This may not be the theoretically correct way 
to handle a volatility position. But lt may be the practical choice glven all the uncertain· 
ties associated with theoretical evaluation as expiration approaches. 
Even If a trader carefully chooses his expiration straddles, the great majortty of time 
no gap will occur in the market In any single case he Is more likely to show a loss than 
a profit A trader needs to remember that the primary concern Is not the profit or loss 
from any single trade, but what happens in the long run. Going back to the roulette 
example in Chapter 3, a player who buys a number at a roulette table can expect to win 
only once in 38 plays. But if the theoretical value of the bet Is 95¢, and the player can 
buy the bet for less than 95¢, he expects to be a winner in the long run. If he pays a 
very low prtce for the bet, say 50¢, he still expects to lose 37 times out of 38. But now 
the bet is very attractive because even if he only wins once in 38 plays, this wtll still be 
often enough to more than offset the small losses he takes each time he loses. The same 
logic ls true of expiration straddles. A trader may lose several times before wtnnlng. 
When he does win, he can expect a return great enough to more than offset all the 
previous losses. 
Because a trader knows that he will lose much more often than he will win, a trader 
. should only invest an amount in expiration straddles which he ls prepared to lose. But 
when conditions are right, a trader ought to be willing to make the investment. Even if 
he loses several ti.mes in succession, ln the long run he will encounter gaps in the market, 
or sudden increases in volatility, often enough to make such strategies profitable. 
VOLATILITY IS INDEPENDENT 
OF THE PRICE OF THE 
UNDERLYING CONTRACT 
When a trader feeds a volatlllty into a theoretical pricing model, the volatility defines a 
one standard deviation price change at any time during the life of the option, regardless 
of whether the underlying contract happens to be rising or falling in price. If a contract 
ls currently at 100, and we assume a volatlllty of 20%, a one standard deviation price 
change ls always based on this volatility of 20%. If at some later time during the llfe of 
the option the contract should move up to 150 or down to 50, 20% ls still assumed to 
be the operative volatility. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ChApftr IH 
Unfortunatel y, this assumptJon seems to fly In the face of most traders' experten ~ 
If one were to ask a stock Index or bond trader whether hJs market were more volatllP 
when rising or falling, he would probably say that It was more vo/aWe when falllng. o 
the other hand, If one were to ask an agricultural or precious metal trader the samo 
question about his market, he would almost certainly give the oppaslte answer. Tho~ 
markets tend to be more volatlle when rising. In other words, the volatlllty of a mark~ 
Is not Independent of the price of the underlying contract. On the contrary, the volatlllty 
over time seems to be dependent on the direction of movement In the underfyfng 
contract. In some cases a trader expects the market to become more volatile If the 
movement Is downward and less volatJle If the movement Is upward; In other cases a 
trader expects the market to become more volatile If the movement Is upward and less 
volatile If the movement Is downward. 
Because volatility In some markets does seem to be dependent on the price of the 
underlying contract, a further variation of the Black-Scholes model has been proposed. 
The constant-elasticity of variance, or CEV, model8 ls based on an assumed relationship 
between volatility and the price level of the underlying contract This relationship 
determines the probabillty of prtce moves of various magnitudes at each moment In 
time. Price changes are still random under a CEV assumption, but the randomness varies 
with the price of the underlying contract. 
Like the jump-diffusion model, the CEV model Is mathematically complex, and 
therefore difficult for most traders to compute. And like the jump-diffusion model it 
requires additional Input In the fonn of a mathematical relationship between the 
volatility and price movement In the underlying contract. Given these difficulties, the 
CEV model has not found wide acceptance among option traders. 
Over small periods of time the percent price changes in an 
underlying contract are normally distributed, resulting in a 
lognormal distribution of underlying prices at expiration 
Does the real world look like a lognonnal distribution? One way to answer the question 
is to ask how percent price changes over small periods of time are distributed. If this 
distribution Is nonnal, then the prices at expiration are likely to be lognonnally 
distributed. 
Figure 18-5a Is a frequency distribution of dally price changes In the S&P 500 stock 
index from 1989 through 1993. Each bar represents the number of occurrences of a 
given price change to the nearest l/4 percent. As one would expect, most of the changes 
are relatively small and close to zero. As we move away from the zero ln either dl.reetlon, 
8. F'Or Information on the CEV model see: 
Cox, John C.; and R~, Stephen A.; "The Valuatlon of Opttons for Altemattve Stochastic Proc~•; 
The Jourrldl of Financial Economics; Volume 3, March 197 6; pages 145-166. 
Beclcers, Stan; "The Constant Ela.sUdty of Variance Model and Its lmpllcattons for Option Pridog9; 
foumil o/Fwnce;June 1980; pages 661-073. 
Schroder, Mark; "C.Omputing the C.Onstant Ela.sUdty of Variance Option Prldng Model"; Jowrul of 
Finance, Vol 44, No. 1; March 1989; ~ 211-219. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Models and the Real World 
Figure 18-Sa: S&P 500 Stock Price Index, 
Percent Dally Price Changes 1989-1993 40! 
225-.----- ---------------
175 
150 
75 
50 
-6 Total number of days• 1265 
Largest upward move• +3.73 % 
Largest downward move • -6.12 % 
Mean• +.0'44% 
Standard de~tion = . 795 % 
Annualized volatility• 12.653 % 
Skewness .. • .352 
Kurtosis = +4.343 
..s .4 .3 -2 normal distribution 
/ 
-1 0 +1 +2 +3 +4 
we encounter fewer and fewer occurrences. The distribution certainly seems to have 
many of the characteristics of a normal distribution. But is it really a normal distribution, 
and if it isn't, how does it differ from such a distribution? 
If the frequency distribution conforms exactly to a normal distribution, the tops of 
the bars should coincide exactly with a true normal distribution. To find out if this is 
the case, the mean (+.044%) and standard deviation (.795%) have been calculated for 
all 1,265 daily price changes over the five-year period. From these numbers, a theoreti­
cally exact normal distribution has been overlaid on our frequency chart. Note that the 
actual frequency distribution is similar to the normal distribution , but there are some 
clear differences. Because the bars representing the small price changes rise above the 
normal distribution curve, there seem to be more small price changes than one would 
expect from a true normal distribution. There are also several large price changes, or 
outliers, which rise above the extreme tails of the normal distribution. These outliers 
seem to indicate that there are more large moves in our frequency distribution than one 
would expect from a true normal distribution. Finally, in the midsections, between the 
peak of the distribution and the extreme tails, there seem to be fewer occurrences than 
one would expect. 
One might at first surmise that differences in Figure 18-5a between the S&P 500 
frequency distribution and the true normal distribution are either unique to the S&P 
500, or an aberration of the five-year period in question. It turns out, however, that price 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

402 ChAPttr 18 
change dlstrtbuUons for almost all underlying markets exhibit characterlstlcs which are 
v ry similar to our S&P 500 distribution. There are usually more days with small mov , 
more days with large moves, and fewer days with Intermediate moves than are 
predicted by a true nonnal dlstrlbutlon. These differences between the real world and 
a theoretical distribution can also be seen In Figures 18·5b and 18-Sc, the dlstrlbutlon 
of price changes for Gennan Bonds and soybeans over the same five-year period. 
SKEWNESS AND KURTOSIS 
Distributions such as those In Figures 1 B·Sa, 18·5b, and 1 B·Sc are approximately 
nonnal, but still differ from a true normal distribution. If one Is trying to make decisions 
based on the characteristics of a distribution, It might be useful to know how the actual 
distribution differs from the normal. A perfectly nonnal distribution can be fully 
described by Its mean and standard deviation. But two other numbers, the skewness 
and kurtosis, are often used to descrtbe the extent of the difference between an actual 
frequency distribution and a true normal distribution. 
The skewness of a distribution (Figure l 8-6a) can be thought of as the lopsidedness 
of the distribution, or the extent to which one tall ls longer than the other tail.9 If a 
distribution Is positively skewed, the rlght·hand tall ls longer than the left-hand tall. If 
Figure 18-Sb: German Bonds, Percent Daily Price Changes 198~1993 
225 
200 
175 
150 
tlJ ! 125 C 
~ :, 
~ 100 
75 
50 
25 normal distribution 
~ 
·1.5 -1 0 •,5 0 +5 Total number of days= 1261 
Largest upward move = +2 323 % 
Largest downward move = -1 930 % 
Mean = + 0038 % 
Standard deviation = 3265 % 
Annulaized volatility = 5 183 % 
Skewness = • 009 
Kurtosis = 6 473 
+10 +15 +2.0 
9. The calculatton of~ and kurtosis can be found In Appendix B. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.... !,{odtlf ind tht Rtal World 403 
Figure 18-Sc: Soybeans, Percent Dally Changes 198~1993 
1so--------------------------...., 
125 
100 
Figure 18-68: Skewness 
Positive Skewness 
(longer right tall) 
I Total number of dtys • 1292 
l.atgttt upward m0vt • + 7. 75 " 
latgttt downWlld mOvt • •7.12 % 
M1111 • •,020% 
Stlndltd deviation • 1.202 % 
Annulalztd YOllll111y • 19.084" 
Sktwntll • +, 152 
Kurtot11 • +◄.eoe 
Negative Skewness 
(longer left tall) / 
\ \ 
\ 
\ 
\ 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

404 
th distribution IS negatively skewed, the left·hand tall ls longer than the right-hand r 1 
A tru normal distribution has a skewness of zero. The frequency dlstMbutlons In F1gur~ 
18· a (S&P 500) and 18·5b (German Bonds) are slightly negatlvely skewed, whll~ h~ 
distribution In Figure 18-Sc (soybeans) Is slightly positively skewed. 
TI1e kurtosis of a dlstrtbutlon (Figure l 8-6b) Is the extent to which the peak or h~ 
distribution Is unusually tall and pointed, or low and flat. A distribution with a positive 
kurtosis has a tall, pointed peak (/eptokurtt c), while a distribution with a negatlv~ 
kurtosis has a low, flat peak (platykurttc). A perfectly normal dlstrlbutlon has a ku 
of zero (mesokurttc). 
Note that a distribution with a low standard deviation also has a pointed peak, ius 
as a distribution with positive kurtosis. But a distribution with a low standard devtaUon 
also has narrow tails, while a distribution with a positive kurtosis has long tails. A 
positive kurtosis distribution ls also narrower, or squeezed Inward, In the midsection 
between Its peak and tails. The frequency distributions In Figures 18-Sa, 18·5b, and 
t 8-Sc exhibit the same positive kurtosis, as do almost all underlying markets. They have 
higher peaks (more days with small moves), more elongated tails (more days with big 
moves), and narrower mldsectlons (fewer days with lntennedlate moves) than are 
predicted by a true normal distribution. 
Figure 18-6b: Kurtosis 
Positive Kurtosis (leptokurtic) (\~ 
Neutral Kurtosis (mesokurtic) ~ 
Ill /---1: ',,, 7•IJ>alykurtic ) 
/) \ \\ 
I \ \ 
-------:: 
I 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Models and the Real World 405 
VOLATILITY SKEWS 
There are clearly real problems associated with the use of a tradlUonal theoreucal pricing 
model. Markets are not flictlonless; prices do not always follow a diffusion process; 
volatility may vary over the life of an option; the real world may not look like a lognormal 
distribution. Wlth all these weaknesses, one might wonder whether theoretlcal pricing 
models have any practical value at all. In fact, most traders have found that pricing 
models, while clearly not perfect, are an Invaluable tool for making decisions In the 
option market. While models don't always work perfectly, they have proven to be far 
better than any other method of evaluating options. 
Still, a trader who wants to make the best possible decisions cannot afford to Ignore 
the problems associated With a theoretical pricing model. Consequently, a trader who 
uses a prtclng model might look for a way to reduce the potential errors resulting from 
these weaknesses. Initially, one might simply look for a better theoretical pricing model. 
If such a model exists, then It Will certainly be worth replacing the old model with the 
new one. But "better" is a relative term. A model might be better ln the sense that lt 
gives slightly more accurate theoretical values. But If the model ls extremely complex 
and difficult to use, or if it requires additional Inputs of which a trader cannot always be 
certain, then the model may merely substitute one set of problems for another. Given 
the fact that most traders are not theoreticians, a more realistic solution might be to use 
a less complex model and somehow fine-tune it so that it Is consistent with the realities 
of the marketplace. 
A trader trying to offset weaknesses in a pricing model might make the assumption 
that the marketplace is using the same model as the trader, and then ask how the 
marketplace is dealing With the weaknesses In the model. This ls somewhat analogous 
to calculating implied volatility where we assumed that everyone was using the same 
model, that the price of the option was known, and that everyone agreed on all the 
inputs except volatility. From these assumptions we were able to determine the 
volatility that the marketplace was implying to the underlying contract Now we want 
to take the same general approach, but ask what weaknesses the marketplace Is 
implying to the model. This is a more difficult question to answer. 
Figure 18-7 shows the settlement prtces and Implied volatilities for December 
options on German Government Bond (Bund} futures traded on the London Interna­
tional Financial Futures and Options Exchange (LIFFE) on July 17, 1992. Since options 
on LIFFE are settled like futures contracts, the effective Interest rate for theoretical 
calculations ls zero. As a result, there ls no economic value to early exercise, and one 
can calculate all Implied volatilities using the Black-Scholes model. 
By most standards German Government Bonds are a very low-volatility contract. 
Even so, the numbers do reflect many of the characteristics of option markets with 
which traders have become famtllar. Note that the Implied volattllties for calls and puts 
at the same exercise price are always the same. If this were not true, the prices would 
reflect an aroitrage opportunity. A trader could profitably execute a conversion If the 
calls were overpriced with respect to the puts; a trader could profitably execute a reverse 
conversion If the puts were overpriced with respect to the calls. The fact that call and 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Flgurt 18·7 
July 27, 1992; Gennan Government Bond (Bund) Futures 
December Futures Contract = 87 .86; Days to ExplNHlon f 19; lnfgrest Rafn 0"/4 
&trcfH Call Call lmplltd Put put 
Prtct Prtct VolaUllty Price fmpHfdVoflffltv 
84.50 3.40 3.98 .04 3.98 
85.00 2.92 3.82 .06 3.82 
85.50 2.46 3.76 . 10 3.78 
86.00 2.02 3.68 .16 3.68 
86.50 1.61 3.62 .25 3.62 
87.00 1.25 3.62 .39 3.62 
87.50 .93 3.58 .57 3.58 
88.00 .67 3.58 .81 3.58 
88.50 .46 3.56 1.10 3.56 
89.00 .31 3.60 1.45 3.60 
89.50 .20 3.62 1.84 3.62 
90.00 .13 3.69 2.27 3.69 
90.50 .08 3.73 2.72 3.73 
91.00 .05 3.81 3.19 3.81 
91.50 .03 3.87 3.67 3.87 
put implied volatilities all line up Indicates an efficient market with respect to arbitrage 
relationshlps.12 
Unfortunately, the Implied volatilities at different exercise prices do not line up, and 
this presents a problem to someone who believes that the Black-Scholes model is one 
hundred percent efficient. Can those traders trading the 89 call or put really bell eve that 
the December futures contract will have a volatility of 3.60, while those trading the 85 
call or put believe the December contract will have a volatility of 3.82? 
If we assume that the exercise prtce, time to expiration, underlying price, and 
interest rate are known, the theoretical value of an option in a Black-Scholes world will 
depend solely on the volatlllty of the underlying contract over the life of the option. 
There can be only one volatility over this period. It's true we won't know what that 
volatility ls until expiration arrives, at which point we can look back in time to see what 
the volatlllty was. But the December Bund future can have only one volatility over its 
llfe. Since all the December Bund options have the same underlying contract, it doesn't 
make sense for every exercise price to have a different implied volatility. A true adherent 
of the Black-Scholes model would plug In his best guess about volatility and begin selling 
those options which appeared to be overpriced and buying those options which 
appeared to be underprlced. We might think of the marketplace as one big trader. If the 
activity ln the marketplace were a result of everyone believing In the efficiency of the 
12. Settlement prices, such as those in Figure 18· 7, are intended to reflect an efficient market with respect 
to arbitrage reJattonshlps. During the trading day, because there ls a bJd/m spread f01 each option, 
and because all trades do not take place simultaneously, markets may appear 1~ efficient 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mode~ and the ReRI World 407 
Black-Scholes model, the selllng of overpriced opUons and the buying of underprlced 
options would eventually cause the Implied volatlllty of every option to line up exactly. 
Yet this almost never happens In any market. 
Toe marketplace, like every lndlvtdual trader, Is trying to evaluate options as 
efficiently as possible, given all the Information available. Whether one believes that 
markets are efficient or not, one can certainly argue that the marketplace ls at least trying 
to be efficient. From the wide range of Implied volatilities found In almost every option 
market, we can reasonably Infer that the marketplace does not think the Black-Scholes 
model is one hundred percent efficient. Unfortunately, trying to Identify the source of 
the inefficiency may not be possible. It might have to do with the fact that markets are 
not frtctlonless; or the fact that prices do not always follow a diffusion process; or that 
volatility may vary over the life of an option; or that the real world may not look like a 
lognormal distrtbutlon. Whatever the reason, the marketplace believes that options at 
any moment are priced efficiently, even if those prices happen to differ from model-gen­
erated values. 
For traders using a theoretical pricing model, prices are often expressed In terms of 
their implied volatilities. A trader who wants to continue using a theoretical pricing 
model, but wants to use it in a way which is consistent with the way the marketplace 
is apparently using the model, might look to the dlstrtbution of Implied volatilities for 
additional information. He might begin by plotting the implied volatilities across 
different exercise prices, and then draw a graph that fits the data points. This has been 
done in Figure 18-8a for December Bund options. 
The resulting graph, usually referred to as the volattllty skew, has a well defined 
,hape. The low point of the graph ls close to the price of the underlying contract ( 87 .86), 
and the tails of the graph rise as we move to exercise prices further away from the 
underlying price. One inference which most traders draw from this shape ls that the 
marketplace appears to believe there is a better chance for a large prtce move In the real 
world than is predicted by the Black-Scholes model. This ls not unreasonable if we look 
again at Figures 18-5a, 18-Sb, and 18-Sc. The outliers seem to indicate that large moves 
occur more frequently In the real world than Is predicted by a normal distribution. It ls 
the possibility of these large moves which apparently causes the marketplace to Inflate 
the prices of options which are far out-of-the-money or deeply in-the-money. 
We can also see that some options are clearly too expensive or too cheap with 
respect to their neighbors. We may not know exactly what the 88.50 call ls worth, but 
we can see that it ls clearly too cheap with respect to the 88 and 89 calls. In the same 
way, we may not know what the 87 put ts worth. But it ls clearly too expensive with 
respect to the 86.50 and 87.50 puts. In the fonner case, a trader might try to sell the 
88.50/89.00/89.50 butterfly. In the latter case, a trader might try to buy the 
86.50/87 .00/87 .50 butterfly. Whatever we think of the skew, there ought to be a 
smooth progression of Implied volatilities from one exercise prtce to the next. 
A trader using the Black-Scholes model might take the view that the volatility skew 
contains useful information which can be Incorporated Into the decislon-makJng proc­
ess. While he might believe that options are generally either overprtced or underpriced, 
he might also believe that the volatility skew reflects the relative value of options. He 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

408 
Figure 18-81 
400 
3.95 
,. 3.90 
3.85 
-~ j 380 
~ 
'i = 3.71S 
Q. 
§ 
3.70 
3.61S 
3.60 )( 
-\-
\ -_ ... 
\ \ \ 
\ 
I\ 
3.55 
84.0 85.0 86.0 7 
:r/ 
I 
~ J 
~ _/ 
)( 
87.0 86.0 89.0 90.0 
Exercise Price I l 
' ~ 
°"Pllfll 
--
-v 
I 
81.0 
might therefore look for a method of using the skew as part of his method of evaluating 
options. Unfortunately, dealln~ with a volatility skew can be a problem because there 
Is no exact fonnula to use as a guide. Moreover, each trader tends to use the skew In a 
way that best serves his ultimate goal. A market maker might treat the skew one way, 
while a speculator or hedger treats the skew In a different way. Addltlonally, each trader 
must determine the relative accuracy of the Information reflected In the skew. A trader 
who disagrees with a skew will find that some strategies will be more attractive than 
others. 
For example, consider a trader who ls active In the Bund option market, and who 
Is trying to find a simple way to Integrate a volatlllty skew Into his theoretical pricing 
model. He wants his theoretical values to be consistent with the skew, but he also has 
an opinion on volatility. What might the trader do? Going back to Agure 18-7, we can 
see that the at-the-money Implied volatility In the Bund option market ls approximately 
3.58. Suppose a trader felt that Implied volatility was too low, and that a more 
reasonable volatility was .25 percentage points higher, at 3.83. If the trader still believed 
that the skew represented the relative value of options, he might raise the whole skew 
.25 volatility points and use these new volatilities to evaluate options at different 
exercise prices. This would reflect his opinion that Implied volatility was too low, but 
would also take Into consideration the relative value of options reflected by the skew. 
In a similar manner, the trader could also shift the skew right or left as the price of 
the underlying contract changed. If the underlying contract several weeks later were to 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Modet and the Real World 40() 
move up 2.00, a trader could keep the shape of the skew constant but shift the whole 
skew up 2 points. At the same time, he could raise or lower the skew, using the 
at-the-money options as a reference point, to reflect his opinion that the Implied 
volatility was either too high or too low. He could again use the resulting skew to 
evaluate options at different exercise prices, and from this Information to decide on a 
strategy. The result of shifting a skew either up or down, or from side to side, ls shown 
In Figure 18-8b. 
Shifting the whole skew might be a reasonable approach If a trader believes that 
the skew will remain constant in the face of changing market conditions. But Is this 
likely? The Implied volatilities at different exercise prices are likely to depend on how 
the marketplace views the likelihood of large moves In the underlying market But au 
moves are relative, both with respect to the underlying price and to time. In relative 
terms a 4 point move in the underlying contract Is larger with the underlying contract 
at 80 (a 5% move) than with the underlying contract at 100 (a 4% move). In relative 
terms a four-point move over a two-week period Is larger than a four-point move over 
a two-month period. 
The fact that the volatility skew Is likely to change with changing market conditions 
is born out In Figure 18-8c. The skew changed its shape, generally becoming more 
severe, as time passed. It also changed Its position as both the price of the underlying 
contract and implied volatility changed. This poses a problem for a trader trying to 
incorporate a volatility skew into a theoretical pricing model. Pricing models are not 
Figure 18-Sb 
4.30 
4.20 \ 
4.10 \ 
I\ 
\ t 4.00 
~ 0 \ \ \ 
> 3.90 
j 
0.. 
E -3.80 
3.70 
3.60 
3.50 
84 \ 
I\ 
}\ 
I 
I 
I 
current 11kew 
85 ~ \ ' ~ R' 
\ 
\ 
' ·~ 
r---...... 
86 87 \ akew, Ith all 
vol1Ul1Ue Jl'IIMcUS _L 
V , 
I I 
~ _V 
, 
~ V V 
/ 
\ 
' 
88 V / " '-.. 
~ ,_ ..--
89 
Exercise Price 90 / 
L -
91 tke ~ with uni erltng con ~ct2.00 hlg er 
/ 
/ 
1. 
'1 
/ 
I 
/ 
..... 
92 93 94 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4/0 
Figure 18-Sc 
6.00...--------~------------ -
5.50 
4,00 \ \ 
11 w1tk1 to expiration 
Bund futures • 89.23 
\/ 
\ 17 wHks to expiration 
\ Bund futures • 87.86 
--- ,,. ---- -. ----,, 6 week• to expiration I Bund futurn • 91.157 
I 
'"'-/ I 
3.50 84L--_, 86,-----,. 8e ___ eo-r----,-----, 9•------:1 
Exercise Price 
only used to evaluate options under current conditions. They are also used to evaluate 
risk under changing market conditions. If a trader wants to fully Incorporate a skew Into 
his model, he needs to know how the skew Is likely to change with changing market 
conditions. 
We noted that movement In the underlying contract Is relative, both with respect 
to the current price of the underlying contract and time to expiration. If we are using a 
theoretical pricing model, we might ask how the model expresses movement In the 
underlying contract. If we know th1s, we can determine how the model expresses the 
relationship between the price of the underlying contract and different exercise prices. 
This may enable us to determine how the skew will change. 
In the Black·Scholes model, movement In the underlying contract Is measured on 
a logarithmic scale, 13 and the relationship between the exercise prtce of an option and 
the current underlying price Is expressed as the logarithm of the exercise price divided 
by underlying price. At the same time, movement over time Is governed by a square 
root relationship, so that In the Black·Scholes model the relative amount of movement 
required to reach an exercise price Is fully expressed as 
!natural logartthm (exercise prtce / underlying prlce)I / square root (time) 
13. f-or a more detailed discussion or the loprlthmlc funttlon, and the relaUonshtp between ume iOii 
volatilltY, see Appendix 8. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

.... 
Models and the Real World 41/ 
where time Is expressed In terms of years. Since we are using the Black-Scholes model 
to calculate the implied volatllltles of the various options, and since the Black-Scholes 
model expresses exercise prices In the way we have just described, perhaps It makes 
sense to express the skew exercise prices In the same way. This has been done In Figure 
18-8d. 
With our new x-axis measurements the skews start to look very much alike. We 
still need to take into consideration the fact that the skews occupy different positions 
because they represent different volatilities. In order to generalize the volatlJlty scale 
(the y-axis), we might consider expressing all volatilities for a given skew In terms of the 
volatility of a theoretical at-the-money option. For example, going back to Figure 18-8a, 
we can see from the graph that with the underlying contract at 87.86, the implied 
volatility of an option with an exercise price of 87.86 (a theoretically at-the-money 
option) would be approximately 3.57%. We can therefore express the volatility at each 
exercise price as the difference between that exercise price's volatility and 3.57. Using 
this approach, the 91 exercise price, with an implied volatility of 3.81 (the point where 
the graph crosses the 90 exercise price), would be assigned a value of 
3.81 -3.57 = .24 
The 86 exercise price, with an implied volatility of 3.68, would be assigned a value of 
3.68-3.57 = .11 
Figure 18-Bd 
6,00-,----r------------,.-- -------, 
5.50 
-~ 5.00 i 
~ 
j 
0. 
_E 4.50 
4.00 \ 
\ 
\ \ 5 weeks to expiration / 
Bund futures = 91.57 y 
I / 
/ 
/. 
/ 2 weeks to expiration 
Bund futures= 91.57 
3.5(),+----.--------.---+-----.---~-----J 
-0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 
ln(ex. price/fut. price)/sqrt(tlme) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4/2 
This method Is s~tlsfactory when Implied volatlllUes remaJn relatively constant Bl( 
suppose the Implied volatlllty In the Bund optlon market were to double to 7.~. 
Under these circumstances, the Implied volatllltles at each exercJse pr1ce can al!O ~ 
expected to double. The 90 exercise price, Instead of having an Implied volatJilty e4 
3.81, will have an Implied volatlllty or 7.62. And the 86 exercise price, Instead of ha~ 
an Implied volatility of 3.68, will have an Implied volatlllty of 7.36. Since Im~ 
volatility can change In the marketplace, we need a method or relatlng the over. 
change In Implied volatlllty to the change In each exercise price's lmplled volatJHry. ~ 
easiest way to do this Is to express the Implied volatlllty at each exercise pr1ce as a 
percent of the at-the-money Implied volatlllty. 
For example, with an at-the-money Implied volatlllty of 3.57, the 90 exercise prfa, 
with an Implied volatlllty of 3.81, would be assl~ed a value of 
3.81 I 3.57 = 106.7% 
The 86 exercise price, with an Implied volatlllty of 3.68, would be assigned a value ot 
3.68 I 3.57 = 103.1% 
Combining this method of expressing the Implied volatlllty In terms of a percent of 
at•the-money volatlllty, together with the logarlthmlc/tlme method of expressing the 
exercise prtce, yields the transformations shown In Agure 18-Be. 
Figure 18-8e 
1401....----,---- --r----.--------r---.----, 
\ 
I 
17 weeks 10 xplrlltlOo 
Sund future • 87.86 
901+---4---4----+-- --t----+-- -­
.0.16 ·0.10 ·0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0 S 
ln(ex. ~Ice/fut. prlce)/sqrt(tlme) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Models and the Real World 4/3 
With our new x-axis and y-axis the skews, while not ldenUcal, tend to look much 
alike. If we were to make the assumption that the skew would look similar to those In 
Figure 18•8e under all condltlons, we might think of the skew as an addltlonal variable 
In a theoretical pricing model. Instead of the five usual variables (tlme to explratJon, 
exercise price, underlying price, Interest rates, volatility), we now have six (Figure 
18·9). 
If we are going to feed the skew Into the model as a variable, we need to do It In a 
way which the model understands. Thls means we need to find a formuJa by which to 
express the skew. While this may sound difficult, many skews can be expressed as 
simple equations. In Figure 18· 10 a function has been graphed out which approximates 
the shape of the volatility skews In Figure 18·8. If we make the assumption that this 
function gives a good approximation of the skew, we can use the function as the 
volatility skew variable in our theoretical pricing model. To analyze the value of an 
option position under changing assumptions about underlying price, time to expiration, 
and volatility, we need only express the volatlllty at each exercise price using this 
function: 
volatility at an exercise price = 
the at-the-money volatility times f(x) 
where the exercise price, E, Is always expressed in relation to lts underlying price, U, 
and the amount of time to expiration, t: 
In {E/U) / ft 
There ls no law that says a trader must agree with the skew Implied ln the option 
market. A trader might believe that there is little chance of an unexpectedly large move 
In the underlying market. In this case, he can lower the wtng.5 of the skew. On the other 
Figure 18-9 
Time to Expiration 
Exercise Price 
Underlying Price 
Interest Rates 
Volatility 
Volatility Skew Theoretical ------►► Theoretical 
------► Pricing Model Value 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

414 
Figure 18-10 
140 
(~j \ 
~ 120 
1i, 
0 t \ 
\ 
\ 
\ wing~ Inflated 
(better chancq of a large move) I / 
I ' I 
I I I I 
I Chapter /8 
-~ 
~ 110~ I \ \ 1, I ,·1 ; ~ / I - > J :rlf,-. --
j a. E 
-100➔ '7/ I ~?> I -~ I ' I \ I 
wing~ reduced 
(smaller chang~ of a large move) f(x) = 30 • (~" 2) + 1 
where~ = ln(ex.price lfl4.pr1ce)/sqrt(time) 
90 I I I I I I 
-0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 
ln(ex. price/fut. price)/sqrt(time) 
hand, if he believes that a there ls a high probability of an unusually large move1 he can 
raise the wtngs of the skew. This type of modification ls also shown in Figure 18-10. 
A market maker can also use the skew to adjust his bids and offers. If the market 
maker finds himself with a large positive gamma position and wants to sell options to 
cut back on the risk associated with the position, he can shift the skew sllghtly 
downward. This will have the effect of lowering his bids and offers on all options. If the 
market maker finds himself short a large number of out-of-the-money calls or puts, he 
can adjust his skew by raising the win~. This Will have the effect of raising his bids and 
offers on out-of-the-money options. 
The Bund options in our example form what is probably the most common skew 
shape, a smile which ls approximately symmetrical. But this ls not always the case. 
Skews can be symmetrical or asymmetrical, and they can reflect inflated or deflated 
implied volatilities across exercise prices, depending on how the marketplace sees the 
possibility, and consequences, of various moves in the underlying market. In addition, 
in stock index markets, because it ls not always possible to take advantage of a mlsprtced 
arbitrage relationship (see Chapter 15), calls and puts with the same exercise prices do 
not necessartly trade at the same implied volatility. For this reason, many traders in stock 
index markets prefer to evaluate call and put skews separately. 
As an example, Figures 18-11 a and 18-11 b represent the implied volatllitl.es of 
March 1993 OEX calls and puts with different amounts of time remalnlng to explra-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Models 11nd the Re11/ World 41 
Figure 18-11a: OEX March 1993 Calls 
~,---r---,-----.---- -
25~ 
;i: 
-201 >, I \I / I I ~ '-.-. \ ~ t I nte•r~--~. 
j 
g 
j l 15 I I ..¥ :::::,, , ", I I '.,_....._-t----+---___.j 
/ 
/ 
_,/ 
/ 
I 11 neeks t1~)(f)ir&tion I I 10 /"\CV -.64 I =--=t ==--l _, -, 
5+-----+-----1r----+-----+--- --+-----+--- --I 
360 370 380 390 400 
Exercise Price 
Figure 18-11b: OEX March 1993 Puts 
30 • •, ' 
25 -t .....? weeks tb expirat~n •• . _ o/[s.2s (406. 79) • 
* --20 ... 
-~ 
~ 
0 
> 
al I ::::::-,. a 1s I ....__ 
E ' 
"--...~ 410 420 430 
1 week to e~piration 
OEX = 412.~7 (412.89) 
'-.. 
\ 
....... 
' '· 
'·•.,. _.// 
,, ··-
10-+-------+- ~--+-- ----t-------j!-------= ~=-----+----j 
5-l----------4------1-------+----+-----+-- ---+----i 
400 360 370 380 390 410 420 430 
Exercise Price 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

416 Chapttr I 
tton.12 Note tl1e extreme Inflation of downside exercise prices, both for caJls and pu 
While It may not be possible to determine exactly what Is causing the skew to have thh 
particular shape (It may Indicate that the marketplace believes stock markets gp tf n11m 
faster than they go up-as witness October J 987--0r It may reflect the fact that 
Index options are often used to hedge long stock portfolios), the marketplace seem 
be giving greater relative value to lower exercise prices. A trader who wanted to u.,~ u ··~ 
marketplace's relative evaluation might try to Integrate the skew Into his theoretical 
pricing model. 
As before, we might try to generallze the skew by expressing each exercise pr1 
in terms of a logartthmlc relationship to the underlying Index price. Stock Index prices, 
Uke stock prices, are assumed to be lognormally distributed around the forward prf ce of 
the index, i.e., the current Index price plus carrying costs less dividends. It therefor 
makes sense to express the exercise price In relation to the forward price rather than to 
the index price: 
ln(exerclse price/forward price)/ ✓time 
This has been done In Figures 18-11 c and 18-11 d. (The forward price of the O EX is in 
parenthesis. l 
While there are clearly some differences between volatility skews in Figures 18-11 c 
and 18-11 d, there is considerably more consistency than one would expect from Figures 
18-11 a and 18-11 b. If a trader wanted to find functions, one for calls and one for puts, 
by which the skews could be expressed, he could use these functions to analyze a 
position under a wide variety of market conditions. 
It is only in the last several years that traders have begun to appreciate the 
importance of volatility skews, both as an evaluation tool and as a risk management 
consideration. This section Is intended not as a solution to all the problems that traders 
encounter in analyzing and using volatility skews, but as an introduction to how traders 
approach the problem. Each trader as he gains more experience must decide how best 
to deal with the volatility skew, gtven the characteristics of the market in which he iS 
dealing, as well as his ultimate goal In that market. 
A FINAL THOUGHT 
Because the use of a theoretical pricing model requires a trader to make so many 
different decisions, both with respect to the inputs into the model and the degree to 
which the assumptions on which the model ls based are likely to be accurate, the new 
option trader may feel that making the right decisions ls simply a matter of luck. While 
luck undoubtedly plays a role in the short run, In the long run those traders who are 
willing to put in the effort required to understand how models work always seem to 
come out ahead. Experienced traders know that using a model, with all Its problems, ls 
still the best way to evaluate options and manage risk. 
12. Because of the posslblllty of early exercise, the Cox·R~·Rubenstetn model~ used to calculate OEX 
implied volatllltles. 
I 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Models and the Real World 
Figure 18-11 c: OEX March 1993 Calls 
220 
200 
~ 
~ 180 
E 
4l s= 
~ ii 160 -0 
~ \ 5 weeks t~ expiration 
OEX = 4ol,.26 (406. 79) 
~ == 140 ii ,--I , \ \, ~/ I I 1 week-le-explr ~tioo-
OEX = 412.67 I (412.89) 0 > 
,::, 
~ 
'a_ 120 
.§ / 417 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
100 l I I ~k ;:t _;::;' r ---. 
eo1-::------t-:------t------+-------l___:------l-------l 
43 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 
ln(ex. price/forward price)/sqrt(time) 
Figure 18-11d: OEX March 1993 Puts 
220 
200 
> ! 180~ I-11 weeks to~xpiration 
OEX = 396. (397.28) 
{ ' 'iii 160 
0 ~ 
~ • 
l':' = 140 'iii 
0 > 
"i ::: 120 l I I/ 1·~ I I '/ / 
/ 
/ 
100 I 5 weeks to e!firation I =--~ j , 
OEX • 406.2, ·•AA -A· ~- / 
80 I 
-0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 
ln(ex. price/forward price)/sqrt(time) 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

418 (Jypter 18 
This text, llke many others on options, may have left the reader with the Impression 
that option evaluation and trading can be reduced to a series of arithmetic calculatiOns. 
The science of option evaluation ls an important part of any trader's education, but 
mathematical models are only a tool to help the trader make decisions. Succes.sful option 
trading ls at least as much an art as a science, and a trader must know where sdern 
leaves off, and other Intangible assets, whether tntultlon or market feel or experience, 
begin. This brings us to one final point, and perhaps the most important prtnclple Of 
option trading: there ts no substitute for common sense. A trader who slaviShly uses a 
model to make every trading decision ls heading for disaster. Only a trader who fully 
understands what a model can and cannot do will be able to make the model his servant 
rather than his master. 