Hedging with Options 
Toe original justification for Introducing options and futures was to enable market 
participants to transfer part or all of the risk associated with holding a position In the 
underlying instrument from one party to another. Options and futures act as Insurance 
contracts. Unlike a futures contract, an option transfers only part of the risk from one 
party to another. In this respect an option acts much more like a traditional Insurance 
policy than a futures contract. 
Even though options were originally Intended to function as insurance policies, 
option markets have evolved to the point where, In most markets, hedgers (those 
wanting to protect an existing position), make up only a small portion of market 
participants. Other traders, Including arbitrageurs, speculators, and spreaders, typically 
outnumber true hedgers. Nevertheless, hedgers still represent an Important force In the 
marketplace, and any sophisticated market participant must be aware of the strategies 
hedgers use to protect their positions. 
Many hedgers come to the marketplace as either natural longs or natural shorts. 
Through the course of normal business actlvttles they will profit from either a rise or fall 
In the price of some underlying Instrument The producer of a commodity (grain, oil, 
precious metals) Is a natural long; If the price of the commodity rises, he will receive 
more when he goes to sell it In the marketplace. The user of a commodity Is a natural 
short; If the price of the commodity falls, he will have to pay less for It when he goes to 
buy It In the marketplace. In the same way, lenders and borrowers In the financial 
markets are natural longs and shorts In tenns of Interest rates. A rise In Interest rates 
Will help lenders and hurt borrowers. A decline In Interest rates will have the opposite 
effect 
Other potential hedgers come to the marketplace because they have voluntarily 
chosen to take long or short positions, and now wish to lay off part or all of the risk of 
that posltlon. A speculator may have taken a long or short position In a certain contract, 
but wishes to temporarily reduce the risk associated with an outright long or short 
Positlon. For example, a portfolio manager Is usually paid to choose which stocks to buy 
for a portfolio. He ls a voluntary long. If he wants to continue to hold certain stocks, but 
believes that the stocks might decline In the short term, he may find It cheaper to 
temporartly hedge the stocks with options or futures than to sell the stocks and buy them 
back at a later date. 
As with Insurance, there Is a cost to hedging. The cost may be immediately apparent 
because It requires an Immediate cash outlay. But the cost may also be more subtle, 
either In terms of lost profit opportunity, or In terms of additional risk under some 
257 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

258 
circumstances. Every hedging decision Is a tradeoff: what ls the hedger wJlllng ro gr,e 
up under one set of market condltlons In order to protect himself under another set? A 
hedger with a long position who wants to protect his downside wlll almost cenafnly 
have to give up somethlng on the upside; a hedger with a short poslUon uytng to protect 
his upside will have to give up something on the downside. 
PROTECTIVE CALLS AND PUTS 
The simplest way to hedge an underlying position using options Is to purchase either a 
call to protect a short position, or a put to protect a long pos!Uon. In each case, If the 
market moves adversely, the hedger Is Insulated from any loss beyond the exercise price. 
The difference between the exercise price and the current prtce of the underlying 1s 
analogous to the deductible portion of an Insurance policy. And the price of the opUon 
Is analogous to the premium which one has to pay for the Insurance policy. 
For example, suppose an Amertcan firm expects to take delivery of OM t ,000,000 
worth of German goods In six months. If the contract reqU!res payment In Deutsche­
marks at the time of delivery, the Amertcan firm has automatically acquired a shon 
position In Deutschemarks against U.S. dollars. If the Deutschemark rises against the 
dollar, the goods will cost more In dollars; If the Deutschemark falls against the dollar, 
the goods will cost less. If the Deutschemark Is currently trading at .60 (60( per OM) 
and remains there for the next slx months, the cost to the American firm wlll be 
$600,000. If, however, at delivery the Deutschemark has risen to .70 (70¢ per dollar), 
the cost to the American firm wlll be $700,000. 
The American firm can offset the risk It has acquired by purchasing a call option on 
Deutschemarks, for example a .64 call. If the firm wants an exact hedge, the underlying 
contract will be DM 1,000,000, and the option will have an expiration date correspond· 
Ing to the date of delivery of the goods. If the value of the Deutschemark begins to rlse 
against the U.S. dollar, the firm will have to pay a higher price than expected when It 
takes delivery of the goods In six months. But the price It will have to pay for 
Deutschemarks can never be greater than .64. If the price of Deutschemarks Is greater 
than .64 at expiration, the finn will simply exercise Its call, effectively purchasing 
Deutschemarks at .64. If the price of Deutschemarks Is less than .64 at expiration, the 
firm wlll let the option expire worthless since It will be cheaper to purchase Deutsche­
marks In the open market. 
A hedger who chooses to purchase a call to protect a short position, or a put to 
protect a long position, has risk limited by the exercise price of the option. At the same 
time, the hedger still maintains open-ended profit potential. If the underlying market 
moves In the hedger's favor, he can let the option expire and take advantage of the 
enhanced value of his position In the open market. If, In our example, the Deutschemark 
were to fall to .55 at the time of delivery, the firm would simply let the .64 call expire 
unexerclsed. At the same time, the firm woU!d purchase OM 1,000,000 for $550,000, 
resulting In an unexpected windfall of $150,000. 
There Is a cost Involved In buying Insurance In the form of a protective call or put, 
namely the price of the option. The cost of the Insurance Is commensurate with the 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fffdttn, wtth Options 259 
amount of protection afforded by the optlon. If the price of a slx·month .64 call ls .007 5 
(¥4c ), the firm wlll pay an extra $7,500 (.0075 x 1,000,000) no matter what happens. 
A call option wtth a higher exercise price will cost less, but It also offers less protection 
ln the fonn of an additional deductible amount. If the flnn chooses to purchase a .66 
call trading at .0025 (1/4¢), the cost for this Insurance Will only be $2,500 (.0025 x 
t ,000,000). But the firm will have to bear any loss up to a Deutschemark price of .66. 
Qnty above .66 ls the flnn fully protected. In the same way, a lower exercise price call 
will offer additional protection, but at a higher price. A .62 call wUI protect the flnn 
against any rtse above .62, but If the prtce of the call ls .015 ( 11/2¢ ), the purchase of this 
protection will add an additional $15,000 (.015 x 1,000,000) to the final costs. 
The cost of purchasing a protective option and the Insurance afforded by the 
strategy ls shown In Figures 13· 1 (protective call) and 13-2 (protective put). Since each 
strategy combines an underlying position with an option position, It follows from 
Chapter 11 that the resulting protected position ls a synthetic option: 
short underlying + long call = long put 
long underlying + long put = long call 
A hedger who buys a call to protect a short underlying position has effectively purchased 
a put at the same exercise prtce. A hedger who buys a put to protect a long underlying 
position has eff ectlvely purchased a call. In our example, If the firm purchases a .64 call 
to protect a short Deutschemark position, the result ts Identical to owning a .64 put 
Figure 13-1 : A Protective Call 
short an underlying posltlon ,/ 
~-------- _/ 
/ 
combined position / 
,/ -~­
/ 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

260 Clup{lr/J 
Figure 13-2: A Protective Put 
/ 
------- ~ 
/ 
/ 
/ \ t 
buy a protective put 
combined position 
Which protective option should a hedger buy? That depends on the amount of risk 
the hedger is willing to bear, something which each market participant must determine 
Individually. One thing is certain. There will always be a cost associated with the 
purchase of a protective option. If the Insurance afforded by the option enables the 
hedger to protect his financial position, the cost may be worthwhile. 
COVERED WRITES 
While the purchase of a protective option offers a limited and known risk, a hedger 
might be willing to accept more risk In return for some other advantage. Instead of 
purchasing an option to protect an existing position, a hedger might consider selllng, or 
writing, an option against the position. Thls strategy does not offer the limited risk 
afforded by the purchase of a protective option but, In Its favor, the strategy results ln a 
cash credit rather than a debit. Thls credit offers some, though not unlimited, protection 
against an adverse move In the underlying market. 
Consider a fund manager whose portfolio consists of a long position in a certain 
stock. If the manager Is worried about a decline In the price of the stock, he might 
choose to sell a call option against the stock. The amount of protection the manager ls 
seeking, as well as the potential upside appreciation, will determine which call is sold, 
whether in-the-money, at-the-money, or out-of-the-money. Selling an In-the-money call 
offers a high degree of protection, but will eliminate most upside profit potential. Selling l 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

HNlfnl wtth Options 261 
an out-of-the-money call offers less protectlon but leaves room for large upside profit 
potential. 
r-or example, If the stock ls currently trading at 100, the fund manager might sell 
a 95 call. If the 95 call ls trading at 6 '12, the sale of the call will offer a high degree of 
protection against a decline In the price of the stock. As long as the stock declines by no 
more than 61t'l, to 93112, the manager wlll do no worse than break even. Unforrunately , 
\f the stock begins to rise, the fund manager wtll not participate In the rtse since the 
stock will be called away when the manager ls assigned on the 95 call. Still, even If the 
stock rtses, the manager will get to keep the 11~-polnt time premium he received from 
the sale or the 95 call. 
Ir the manager wants to paitlclpate In upside movement In the stock, and Is also 
wllllng to accept less protection on the downside, he might sell a 105 call. If the I 05 
call ls trading at two, the sale of this option will only protect him against a two-point 
ran, to 98, ln the price of the stock. If, however, the stock begins to rtse, he Will 
participate point for point ln this advance up to a prtce of 105. Above 105, he can expect 
the stock to be called away. 
Whlch option should the manager sell? Again, that ls a subjective decision based 
on how much rtsk the manager ls willlng to take as well as the amount of upside 
appreciation tn which he wants to participate. Many covered wrtte programs Involve 
selling at-the-money options. Such options offer less protection than In-the-money calls, 
and less profit potential than out-of-the-money options. An at-the-money option ts pure 
tlme premium. If the market sits still, a portfolio of at-the-money options have been sold 
against an existing posltlon tn the underlying Instrument will show the greatest 
appreciation tn value. 
The value of typical covered writes, also known as overwrites, are shown in Agures 
13-3 (covered call) and 13-4 (covered put). When the underlying ts purchased and calls 
are simultaneously sold against the position, a covered write ts also referred to as a 
buy/write. As with the purchase of a protective option, a covered write consists of a 
position tn the underlying and an option. It can therefore be expressed as a synthetic 
position: 
long underlying + short call = short put 
short underlying + short put = short call 
A hedger who sells a call to protect a long underlying position has effectively sold a put 
at the same exercise prtce. A hedger who sells a put to protect a short underlying 
position has effectively sold a call. In our example, If the portfolio manager sells a 100 
call to protect a long stock position, the result ls Identical to selltng a 1 00 put. 
The purchase of a protective option and the sale of a covered option are the two 
most common hedging strategies Involving options. If given a choice between these 
strategies, which one should a hedger choose? In theory, the hedger ought to base his 
decision on the same criteria as the pure trader: price versus value. In general, tf the 
price of an option ls lower than its value, then the purchase of a protective call or put 
makes the most sense. If the price of an option ts higher than Its value, then the sale of 
a covered call or put makes the most sense. By comparing Implied volatility to a forecast 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

l 
262 aa,pttr /J 
Figure 13-3: A Covered Call 
combined position 
sell a covored call 
~ \~ 
◄---------
long an underlying position 
Figure 13-4: A Covered Put 
combined position I sell a covered put 
+ -------~ 
short an underlying position 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hfdttn, WUh Options 263 
volatUlty, a hedger ought to be able to make a sensible determinatio n as to whether he 
wants to buy or sell options. Of course, he is still left with the choice of exercise prices. 
Th\s wm depend on the amount of adverse or favorable movement the hedger foresees, 
as weu as the risk he ls wllllng to accept lf he ts wrong. 
Whtie theoretical considerations wlll often play a role In a hedger's decision, 
practical considerations may also be Important. If a hedger knows that he will be forced 
out of business lf the underlying contract moves beyond a certain price, then the 
purchase of a protective option at that exercise prtce may be the most sensible strategy, 
regardless of whether the option ls theoreucally overprtced. t 
Most hedgers find, however, that there ls a psychological barrier to buying options. 
·Why should I lay out money for an option when I wlll probably lose the premium?" 
The hedger ls right. Most of the time he wlll lose the premium because most of the time 
the option wm expire worthless. But the same hedger who refuses to purchase an option 
to protect hls business deallngs would never consider leaving his home or family 
uninsured. Uke options, the great majority of Insurance policies expire without claims 
ever being made against them. Houses do not burn down; people live on; cars are not 
stolen. That ts the reason insurance companies make a profit But the purchaser of an 
Insurance policy ls wllllng to accept the fact that insurance companies make profits. 
Unlike the Insurance company, which ls selling the Insurance contract with the clear 
Intent of making a profit, the purchaser of an Insurance contract ls not purchasing the 
contract to make money. He is purchasing It for the peace of mind which It affords. The 
same philosophy should apply to the purchase of options. If a hedger needs the 
protection afforded by the option, the purchase makes sense in spite of the fact that it 
is llkely to be a losing proposition in the long run. 
FENCES 
Suppose a hedger desires the limited risk afforded by the purchase of a protective option, 
but also wants to avoid the cash outlay associated with such a strategy. What can he 
do? A popular strategy, known as a fence, ls to simultaneously combine the purchase 
of a protective option with the sale of a covered optlon. For example, with an underlying 
contract at 50, a hedger with a long posltlon might choose to simultaneously sell a 55 
call and purchase a 45 put. The hedger ts Insulated from any fall In price below 45, since 
he can then exercise his put. At the same time, he can participate In any upward move 
to 55, at which point his underlying position will be called away. The cost of the 
complete hedge depends on the prices of the 45 put and 55 call. If they are the same, 
the cost of the hedge ls zero. If the price of the 55 call is greater than the price of the 
45 put, the hedge can be established for a credit which the hedger gets to keep no matter 
where the underlying finishes. With prices of 1.25 and 1.75 for the 45 put and 55 call, 
the hedger wlll receive a credit of .SO. This will reduce his break-even price on the 
underlying position to 49 .50. 
I. Of course, Jf the options are wildly overpriced, a hedger might be reluctant to buy a protective optlon. 
But th1s Is unlJJcely to happen. If optlon prices are hlgb, there 1s usually a valid re~n. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

264 l'hApf tf 11 
Recalling tl1e basic syntheUc relaUonshlps, we find that a long fenc~ ri g t 6 
underlying, short a covered call, long a protecuve put) Is simply a bull vertical pr~ 
done synthetlcally. Suppose In our example fence consisting of a long 45 put and ~ 0 
55 call, we replace the 45 put with Its synthetic equivalent: 
tong 45 put = short underlying+ long 45 call 
45/55 fence = long underlying + long 45 put + short 55 call 
= long underlying+ (short underlying+ long 45 call) + short 55 call 
= long 45 call + short 55 call 
A short fence consists of a short underlying position together With the purchase of 
a protective call and sale of a covered put. Since we can always rewrite one of the 
options wtth its synthetic equivalent, this ls simply a bear vertical spread. Long and sho 
fences are shown In Figures 13-5 and 13-6. 
Fences are popular hedging tools because they offer known protection at a Jow cost, 
or even a credit. At the same time, they still allow a hedger to participate, at least 
partially, in favorable market movement Fences go by a variety of names: range 
forwards, tunnels, cylinders; among floor traders they are sometimes known as split­
prtce conversions and reversals. 
As the borrowing and lending of funds has become more Widespread, and since 
such activity is often based on a floating interest rate, the use of options to hedge long 
or short interest rate positions has become especially popular. A firm which borrows 
Figure 13-5: A Long Fence 
sell a covered call I // .. 
/ combined position / f 
◄--
·, 
-------~--_.. \ ~ 
buy a protective put 
long an underlying position 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

H~ With Options 265 
Flgu.,. 13-6: A Short Fence 
combined position \ "'' • ""''"" put / • / ----------- - -► 
/ / 
I 
buy a protective call / 
short an underlying position 
funds at a variable interest rate has a short interest rate position. A fall In Interest rates 
will reduce Its cost of borrowing, while a rise In Interest rates wUl Increase Its costs. To 
cap the upside risk, the firm can purchase an Interest rate call, thereby establishing a 
maximum amount It will have to pay for borrowed funds. No matter how hlgh interest 
rates rise, the borrower wm never have to pay more than the cap's exercise price. 
An Institution which lends funds at a variable Interest rate has a long Interest rate 
position. A rise in interest rates will Increase its returns, while a fall in Interest rates will 
reduce lts returns. To set a jlooron Its downside risk, the Institution can purchase an 
interest rate put, thereby establishing a minimum amount it wm receive for loaned 
funds, no matter how low interest rates fall. No matter how low Interest rates fall, the 
lender will never receive less than the floor's exercise price. 
If a borrower {lender) simultaneously buys a cap (floor) and sells a floor (cap), he 
has established a collar to his position. Thls Is simply a fence done In the Interest rate 
market. 
COMPLEX HEDGING STRATEGIES 
Since most hedgers are not professional option traders, and have neither the time nor 
desire to carefully analyze option prices, simple hedging strategies Involving the pur­
chase or sale of single options are the most widely used. However, if one ls willing to 
do a more detailed analysis of options, it ls possible to construct a wide variety of hedging 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66 l'l'IApl" 11 
strat ~es which Involve both volaUllty and dlrectlonal considerations. r n ord~r rn 
thl ~ hedger must be familiar with both volaUllty and lts Impact on optJon valu , ~ t1 
th d lta as a measure of directional risk. The hedger can then combine his knowf~t1~ 
or optlons with the practical conslderatlons of hed~ng. 
As 8 first step In choosing a strategy, a hedger might consider the follow1ng; 
1. Does the hedge need to offer protection against a "worst case" scenal1o? 
2. How much of the current directional rtsk should the hedge eliminate? 
3. What additional risks Is the hedger wllllng to accept? 
A hedger who needs disaster Insurance In order to protect against a "worst case" 
scenario only has a choice of which optlonls) to buy. Even so, he still needs to decide 
which exercise price to purchase and how many options. For example, suppose a hedger 
has a long position In a certain underlying contract currently trading at 1 oo. Suppose 
also that the hedger decides to buy a put because he needs to limit the downside rtsk to 
some known and fixed amount Which put should he buy? 
Suppose the hedger has determined that options are generally overpriced (Implied 
volatility ts too high). Clearly, any option purchase will be to the hedgers' disadvantage . 
If his sole purpose ts to hedge his downside risk without regard to upside profit potentlal, 
he ought to avoid options and hedge himself In the futures or forward market. H, 
however, he still wants upside profit potential, he must ask himself how much of a long 
position he wants to retain. For example, he might be willing to retain 50% of his current 
long position. This simply means that he has to purchase puts With a total delta of -50. 
He can do this by purchasing one at-the-money put with a delta of -50, or several 
out-of-the-money puts whose deltas add up to -50. But in a high implied volatlllty 
market one usually tries to buy as few options as possible and sell as many options as 
possible. (This is analogous to constructing a ratio vertical spread.) Hence, purchaSing 
one put with a delta of -50 will be less costly, theoretically, than purchasing several 
options with a total delta of -50. If the hedger wants to eliminate even more of the 
directional risk, say 75%, under these circumstances he would be better off purchasing 
one put with a delta of-75. 
All other factors being equal, in a high Implied volatility market a hedger 
should buy as few options as possible and sell as many options as possible. 
Conversely, in a low imp/Jed volatility market a hedger should buy as many 
options as possible and sell as Jew options as possible. 
This means that If all options are overpriced limplied volatility ls too high), and the 
hedger decides he Is Willlng to accept the unlimited downside risk that goes with the 
sale of a covered call, In theory he ought to sell as many calls as possible to reach his 
hedging objectives. If he is trying to hedge 50% of his long underlying position, he can 
do a ratio write by selling several out·of·the-money calls with a total delta of 50, rather 
than selllng a sln~e at-the-money call with a delta of 50. 
There Is an additional problem if one sells several calls against a single long 
underlying position. Now the hedger not only has the unllmlted downside rtsk which 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hfdttrlt With Options 267 
goes wtth a covered call position, but he also has unlimited upside risk because he has 
sold more calls than he can cover wtth the underlying. If the market moves up far 
enough, he wlll be assigned on all the calls. Most hedgers want to restrict their unllmlted 
risk to one direction, usually the direction of their natural position. A hedger with a Jong 
underlylngposttlon maybe willing to accept unlimited downside rtsk, but he ls probably 
unwilling to accept unlimited upside risk. A hedger wtth a short underlying position may 
be w\lllng to accept unlimited upside risk, but he ls probably unwf lltng to accept 
unllmlted downside risk. A hedger who constructs a position with unlimited rtsk tn 
either direction ts presumably taking a volatlllty posltlon. There ts nothing wrong with 
this, since volatlllty trading can be highly profitable. But a true hedger ought not lose 
sight of what his ultimate goal ls: to protect an extstlngposltlon, and to keep the cost of 
this protection as low as possible. 
A hedger can also protect a position by constructing one-to-one volatility spreads 
with deltas which yield the desired amount of protection. For example, a hedger who 
wants to protect 50% of a short underlying posltlon can buy or sell time spreads or 
butterflies with a total delta of +50. Such spreads offer partial protection within a range. 
The position still has unlimited upside risk, whlle It also retains unlimited downside 
profit potential. Such volatility spreads also gtve the hedger the choice of buying or 
selling volatility. If implied volatility ts generally low, with the underlying market 
currently at 100, the hedger might protect a short position by purchasing a 110 call time 
spread (purchase a long-term 110 call, sell a short-term I IO call}. This spread has a 
positive delta and, at the same time, ts theoretically attractive since the low Implied 
volatility makes a long time spread relatively inexpensive. If the 110 call time spread 
has a delta of +25, to hedge 50% of hls directional risk the hedger can buy two time 
spreads for each short underlying position. Conversely, If Implied volatility ls high, the 
hedger can consider selling tlme spreads. Now he wtll have to choose a lower exercise 
price to achieve a positive delta. If he sells the 90 call time spread (purchase a short-term 
90 call, sell a long-term 90 call), he will have a position with a posltlve delta and a 
positive theoretical edge. If he wants to protect 75% of his position, and the spread has 
a delta of +25, he can sell the spread three times for each underlying position. 
In the same way, a hedger can also buy or sell vertical spreads to achieve a desired 
amount of protection. Depending on whether options are generally underprtced or 
overprtced (implied volatility ls too low or too high), the hedger wlll work around the 
at-the-money option. With the underlying market cUJTently at 100, the hedger who 
wants to protect a long position can sell a vertical call spread with a negative delta (sell 
the lower exercise price call, buy the higher exercise price call). If Implied volatlllty ts 
high, he wlll prefer to sell an at-the-money option and buy an out-of-the-money option. 
If tmplled volatlllty ls low, he will prefer to sell an In-the-money option and buy an 
at-the-money option. Each spread will have a negative delta, but wtll also have a positive 
theoretical edge since the at-the-money option ls the most sensitive to changes ln 
volatlllty. 
As ls obvious, using options to hedge a position can be just as complex as using 
options to construct trading strategies. Many factors go Into the decision-making 
process. When a potential hedger ls confronted for the first time with the multitude of 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

268 {Juptt, IJ 
possible strategies, he can understandably feel overwhelmed, to the point where ~ 
decides to abandon opUons completely. When this happens the hedger, or so~, 
advtslng the hedger, should lay out a limited number of strategies (perhaps four or fttJ 
which make sense, and compare the various rtsk/reward charactertstlcs of the stJ'i 
gles. Given the hedger's general market outlook, and his Willingness or unwtll1n&ne1 to accept certain rtsks, It should then be possible to make an lntelllgent decision. A 
summary of common hedging strategies, with some of their advantages and dlsadVi!t 
tages, Is ~ven In Figure 13·7. 
PORTFOLIO INSURANCE 
Suppose a hedger holds a long position In a certain asset, and he wants to protect his 
holding against downward movement by purchasing a put option. Unfortunate ly, tl't 
hedger finds that no option market for this asset exists. Nor Is any other source, such as 
an option dealer, available. Is there any way the hedger can create the put option 
himself? 
If the hedger were really able to purchase a put, his position would be: 
long underlying+ long put 
But we know from the synthetic relationships In Chapter 11 that a long underlying 
position together with a long put Is equivalent to a long call. Therefore, the hedger really 
wants to own a call with the same exercise price as the put. 
What would be the charactertstlcs of this call? We could analyze the call using a 
theoretical pricing model. In order to do that, we need to know what the underlying 
asset Is, and then we need to determine the Inputs Into the model. Suppose the 
underlying asset Is a futures contract, and that we plan to use the following Inputs: 
exercise price = 100 
time to expiration = 10 weeks 
underlying price = 101.35 
Interest rate = 8% 
volatility = 18.3% 
Feeding these Inputs Into a theoretical pricing model, we find that the call option which 
the hedger would like to own has a delta of 57. This means that if the hedger actually 
owned the call (Instead of owning the underlying asset together with a 100 put} In 
theory he would have a position equivalent to owning 57% of hls asset Therefore, if he 
wants to replicate the combination of the underlying asset and the 100 put, he must sell 
off 43% of his holdln~ In the asset. When he does that, he will have a posltlon 
theoretically equivalent to owning a 100 call. 
Now suppose a week passes and the value of his asset has risen to 102.26. What 
would be the delta of the 100 call which the hedger desires to own? Again, feeding all 
the Inputs into a theoretical pricing model, we find that the call now has a delta of 62. 
If the hedger wants a position which Is equivalent to a long call, he now needs to own 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Figure 13-7: Summary of Hedging strategies 
Po.ltlon Hedging Strategy AdvanlagN 
long buy a Protecttve put limited downside nsklun#mlted ups#de profft 
Undertylng potential positive theoretical edge 
sell a covered call potential positive theoretical edge 
short 
Undertying long fence 
(buy a put, sell a call) 
ratio put purchase 
ratio call write 
bear vertical spread 
bear time spread 
buy a protective call 
sell a covered put 
short fence 
(buy a cal, sel a put) 
ratio call purchase 
ratio put write 
bun vertical spread 
bull time spread limited downside risk 
potential credit If call price exceeds put price 
unlimited upside profiVunlimlted downside profit 
potential positive theoretical edge 
potential positive theoretical edge 
unlimited upside profit 
potential positive theoretical edge 
unlimited upside profit 
potential positive theoretical edge 
limited upside risk/unHmltec:t downside profit 
potential positive theoretical edge 
potential positive theoretical edge 
limited upside risk 
potential credit If put price exceeds call price 
unlimited downside profit/unlimited upside profit 
potential positive theoretical edge 
potential positive theoretical edge 
unlimited downside profit 
potential positive theoreticaJ edge 
unHmlled downside profit 
potential, positive theoretical edge DINdvantage 
poten tfal negative theoretical edge 
unHmlted downside risk 
potentJal negative theoretfcaJ edge 
limited upside profit 
potential debit If put price exceeds call price 
potential negative theoretical edge 
unlimited downside risk/unlimited upside risk 
potential negative theoretical edge 
unlimited downside risk 
potential negative theoretical edge 
unlimited downside risk 
potential negative lheoretical edge 
potential negative theoretical edge 
unlimited upside risk 
potential negative theoretical edge 
limited downside profit 
potential debit If can price exceeds put prtoe 
potential negative theoretical edge 
unlimited upside r1sk/UnHmlted downside risk 
potential negative theoretical edge 
unUmlted upside risk 
potential negative theoretical edge 
unlimited upside rtsk 
potential negative theoretical edge -, J J 
i i 
~ "() 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

270 C/upltr/J 
62% of his original holding In the underlying asset He must therefore buy back 5l ~ 
his original holding in the asset. 
Suppose another week passes and the value of the asset has fallen to 99.07. USUJi 
the new market condltlons, the 100 call would now have a delta of 46. In order r.o 
replicate the call posltlon, the hedger must now sell off 16% of the asset, so that he owns 
only 46% of his original holding. 
Notlce what the hedger Is doing. He Is periodically rehedgtng his ortglnal holdlrig 
to create a position with the same delta charactertstlcs as the call. If he continues to do 
this over the ten-week pertod, he has, In effect, created a ten-week call at an exerciu 
price of 100. 
The reader may have already realized that we are simply repeatlng the example 1n 
Flgure 5.11 but In a slightly different form. In that example, we purchased an under• 
priced call and replicated the sale of the same call through a contlnuous rehedgtng 
process. In our current example we are also replicating the call through a continuous 
rehedglng process. But here we want to purchase the call rather than sell It. AJJ our 
adjustments are therefore the opposite of those In Figure S· 1. Note also that at week ten 
(expiration), Instead of liquidating the position, as we did In Figure S· l, we plan to buy 
In the remainder of the asset. It was always our Intention to retain our entire holding of 
the asset at expiration. The replicated position In our current example Is shown In Agure 
13-8. 
In order to replicate the call, the hedger wlll have to buy back some of the asset 
when the market rises and sell some of the asset when the market falls. The unfavorable 
adjustments (buying high, selling low) suggests that there will be a cost associated with 
this rehedglng process. What wlll the cost be? If the replication process offers the same 
protection as owning a 100 put, then one might expect the cost of the repllcatlon 
process to be the same as the theoretical value of the ten week 100 put This Is Indeed 
the case. Using the previously listed inputs, the Black-Scholes model yields a theoretical , 
value for the 100 put of 2.55. This Is Identical to the cost of the repllcatlon process 
descrtbed In Figure 13-8. 
The rehedglng process Is an attempt to replicate the automatic rehedglng charac· 
terlstics of the option. As a hedge against an underlying position, an option has the very 
desirable characteristic of offering greater protection as the market moves adversely, and 
less protection as the market moves favorably. In effect, the option automatically 
rehedges Itself to fit the required amount of protection. This Is the influence of the 
gamma on the option's delta. When a hedger attempts to replicate the characteristics of 
an option by continuously re hedging the underlying position himself, he ls simply trying 
to replicate the automatic rehedglng (gamma) characteristics of the option. The cost of 
the option, or the cost of the rehedglng process, Is the price the hedger pays for the 
option's gamma characteristics. 
Since we need to continuously compute the delta to replicate an optlon through a 
rehedgtng process, this method of replication requires us to use a theoretical pricing 
model. We are therefore likely to encounter many of the same problems which we 
encounter anytime we use a theoretical pricing model to evaluate an optlon. Is the 
model Itself correct? Do we have the right Inputs? Leaving aside the question of the 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

271 
figure 13-8 
%of Alltt 
Asaet Dtlta of Needtd tor Requl'9d 
Week Value 100 call RepllcaUon A~Ulbntnt 
0 101.35 57 57% seU 43°/4 
1 102.26 62 62% buy5% 
2 99.07 46 46% sell 16% 
3 100.39 53 53% buy7% 
4 100.76 56 56% buy3o/o s 103.59 74 74% buy 18% 
6 99.26 45 45% sell29% 
7 98.28 35 35% sell 1001. 
8 99.98 50 50% buy 15% 
9 103.78 93 93% buy43% 
10 102.54 100 100% buy7% 
model's correctness, anyone wishing to use this method wm have to come up with a 
reasonable volatility estimate. If the volatlllty estimate turns out to be too high or too 
low, the cost of replicating the option wlll be more or less than orlglnally expected. But 
notice that the cost of replication wlll always be the right cost If the market ls more 
volatile than expected, the cost will be greater ln terms of required adjustments. But the 
value of the option would also have been greater. Higher volatlllty means a higher 
theoretical value. In the same way, If the market ls less volatlle than expected, the cost 
will be less in terms of required adjustments. The value of the option would also have 
been less. Lower volatility means a lower theoretical value. 
This process of continuously rehedging an underlying position to replicate an optlon 
position ls often referred to as portfolio Insurance. The method can be used to protect 
any long or short position against adverse movement, but It ls most commonly used by 
fund managers who wish to Insure the value of the securities In a portfollo against a 
drop 1n value. For example, suppose a manager has a portfollo of securities currently 
valued at $100 mllllon. If he wants to insure the value of the portfollo against a drop In 
value below $90 mllllon, he can elther buy a $90 million put, or he can repllcate the 
characteristics of a $90 million call. If he ls unable to find someone w1lllng to sell him 
a $90 milllon put, he can evaluate the characteristics of the $90 mllllon call and 
continuously buy or sell the portion of his portfolio required to replicate the call posltlon. 
In effect, he has created his own put. 
Unfortunately, the costs of buying and selllng a large number of securttles in odd 
amounts may be quite high. While the concept of portfolio Insurance may be attractive 
from a theoretical perspective, the transaction costs may make the process too expensive 
to be of practical value. Is there any way a fund manager can use portfolio Insurance 
while keeping transaction costs within acceptable bounds? One common method 
Involves using futures contracts as a substitute for the portfolio holding. If the mix of 
securities In a portfolio approximates an index, and futures contracts are available on 
that index, the manager can approximate the results of portfolio Insurance by purchas· 
Ing or selllng futures contracts to Increase or decrease the holdln~ in his portfollo. In 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

272 Chapttr /J 
the United States several Index futures are available, the most popular being the futurei 
contract on the S&P 500 Index traded at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Many fimd 
managers use S&P 500 futures to insure their portf ollos against adverse movement In 
the stock market. This method ls not without rtsk, since the ~P 500 Index ls unllieJ'( 
to exactly duplicate the holdings of any one portfolio. Still, the risk may be acceptable 
given the reduced transaction costs. 
Even If options are available on an underlying asset, a hedger may still choose ro 
effect a portfolio insurance strategy himself rather then purchasing the option ln ~ 
marketplace. For one thing, he may consider the option too expensive. If he believes 
the option ls theoretically overpriced, In the long run It will be cheaper to contlnuousfy 
rehedge the portfollo. Or he may find Insufficient liquidity ln the option market to absorb 
the number of option contracts he needs to hedge hls position. Finally, the explratlon 
of options which are avallable may not exactly correspond to the period over which he 
wants to protect his position. If an option ls avallable, but expires earller than desired, 
the hedger might still choose to purchase options ln the marketplace, and then pursue 
a portfolio insurance strategy over the period following the option's expiration. For all 
these reasons, portfolto Insurance has become an Increasingly popular method of 
protecting a position ln an underlying asset. 