Introduction to 
Theoretical Pricing Models 
In the last chapter we looked at some of the simple option strategies a trader might 
tnltiate given an opinion on an underlying contract's likely price movement Whatever 
the basts for the oplnlon, lt will probably be expressed wtth terms such as "good 
chance," "highly Ukely," "possible," "improbable," etc. The problem with this approach 
ts that opinions cannot easlly be expressed ln numerical terms. What do we really mean 
by "good chance"? Or by "highly unllkely"? If we want to approach option markets 
logically we will need some method of quantifying our opinions about prtce movements. 
From the elementary strategies discussed ln the previous chapter it ls clear that the 
direction ln which the underlying market moves can have a signlflcant effect on the 
profltablllty of an option strategy. Consequently, option traders are sensitive to the 
direction ln which the underlying market moves. But an option trader has an additional 
problem: the speed of the market. A commodity trader who belleves a commodity will 
rise ln price within a specified period can be reasonably certain of making a profit if he 
ls right He simply buys the commodity, waits for lt to reach his target price, then sells 
the commodity for a profit. 
The situation ls not quite so simple for an option trader. Suppose a trader belleves 
a commodity will rise ln price from $100, its present price, to $120wlthln the next five 
months. Suppose also that a $110 call expiring ln three months ls available at a price of 
$4. If the commodity rises to $120 by expiration, the purchase of the $110 Will result 
In a profit of $6 ($10 lntrlnslc value less the $4 cost of the option). But ls this profit a 
certainty? What will happen lf the price of the commodity remains below $110 for the 
next three months and only reaches $120 after the option expires? Then the option Will 
expire worthless and the trader will lose his $4 investment. 
Perhaps the trader would do better to purchase a $110 call which expires In six 
months rather than three months. Now he can be certain that when the commodity 
reaches $120, the call will be worth at least $10 in Intrinsic value. But what if the price 
of the six-month option ts $12? In that case the trader might still show a loss. Even 
though the underlying commodity reaches the target price of $120, there ls no 
guarantee that the $11 O call will ever be worth more than its $10 lntrlnslc value. 
A trader in an underlying market ls almost exclusively Interested in the direction 
in which the market Will move. While the option trader is also sensitive to directional 
considerations, he must also give careful consideration to how fast the market is llkely 
35 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36 
to move. U a futures trader and an option trader take long market positions ln Chelr 
respective Instruments, and the market does In fact move hJgher, the futures trader Is 
assured of a profit while the option trader may show a loss. If the market faUs to move 
sutflclently fast, the favorable directional move may not be enough to offset the optJon's 
loss In time value. This Is the primary reason speculators generally lose In optlon 
markets. A speculator usually buys optlons for their seemingly favorable nsk/reward 
characteristlcs (limited risk/unlimited reward). But If he purchases options, not only 
must he be light about market direction, he must also be right about market speed. Only 
lf he ls right on both counts can he expect to make a profit If predicting the correct 
market direction ls dffflcult, correctly predicting direction and speed Is probably beyond 
most traders' capabllltles. 
The concept of speed Is vital In trading options. It ls so important that there are 
many option strategies which depend only on the speed of the underlying market and 
not at all on its dlrectlon. Indeed, If a trader Is highly proficient at predicting directional 
moves In the underlying market, he ls probably better ad Vised to stick to the underlying 
instrument It Is only when he has some feel for the speed component that a trader can 
hope to lntelllgently enter the option market 
The option trader who wants to Intelligently evaluate the potential profitability of 
an option trade Is faced with the task of analyzing several different factors. At a 
minimum he must consider: 
1. The price of the underlying contract 
2. The exercise price 
3. The amount of time remaining to expiration 
4. The direction In which he expects the underlying market to move 
5. The speed at which he expects the underlying market to move 
Ideally, he would like to express each of these factors numerically, feed the 
nwnbers into a formula, and derive a value for the option. By comparing the value to 
Its price in the marketplace, the trader would then know whether the purchase or sale 
of the option was likely to be profitable. This is essentially the goal of option evaluation: 
to analyze an option based on the terms of the option contract, as well as current market 
conditions and future expectations. 
EXPECTED RETURN 
Suppose we are given the opportunity to roll a six-sided die, and each time we roll we 
wm receive a dollar amount equal to the number which comes up. If we roll a one, we 
get $1; if we roll a two, we get $2; and so on up to six, in which case we get $6. If we 
were to roll the die an Infinite number of times, on average, how much would we expect 
to receive per roll? 
We can calculate the answer using some simple arithmetic. There are six numbers 
which can come up, each with equal probablllty. If we add up the six possible outcomes 4lliiiii 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models 31 
l + 2+3+4+ 5+6=21 and divide this by the six races or the die we get 21 / 6 = 3112. Toa t 
ts, on average we can expect to get back $3112 each Ume we roll the die. This ls the 
average, or expected, return. Ir someone were to charge us for the prlvflege of rolling 
the die, what might we be willing to pay? If we purchased the chance to ro!J the die for 
less than $31/2, In the long run we would expect to be winners. If we paid more than 
$311'2, In the long run we would expect to be losers. And lf we paid exactly $311i, we 
would expect to break even. Note the quallfylng phrase 11ln the long run." The expected 
return of $31/2 ls a reallstlc goal only If we are allowed to roll the die many, many times. 
If we are allowed to roll only once, we cannot count on getting back $3112. Indeed, on 
any one roll Jt Is Impossible to get back $31/2 since no face of the die has exactly 3112 
spots. Nevertheless, If we pay less than $31"2 for even one roll of the dle, the laws of 
probabilJty are on our side because we have paid less than the expected return. 
In a similar vein, consider a roulette bet A roulette wheel has 38 slots, numbered 
1 through 36, 0 and 00.1 Suppose a casino allows a player to choose a number. If the 
player's number comes up, he receives $36; lf any other number comes up, he receives 
nothing. What Is the expected return from this proposltlon? There are 38 slots on the 
roulette wheel, each with equal probablllty, but only one slot wtll return $36 to the 
player. If we divide the one way to Win $36 by the 38 slots on the wheel, the result ls 
$36/38 = $.9474, or about 95¢. A player who pays 95¢ for the privilege of picking a 
number at the roulette table can expect to break about even In the long run. 
Of course, no casino wlll let a player buy such a bet for 95¢. Under those conditions 
the casino would make no profit. In the real world, a player who wants to purchase 
such a bet WIil have to pay more than the expected return, typically $1. The 5¢ 
difference between the $1 prtce of the bet and the 95¢ expected return represents the 
profit potential, or edge, to the casino. In the long run, for every dollar bet at the roulette 
table, the casino can expect to keep about 5¢. 
Given the above conditions, any player interested In making a profit would rather 
switch places with the casino so that he could be the house. Then he would have a 5¢ 
edge on his side by selllng bets worth 95¢ for $1. Alternatively, the player would llke 
to find a casino where he could purchase the bet for less than its expected return of 95¢, 
perhaps 88 ¢. Then the player would have a 7 ¢ edge over the casino. 
THEORETICAL VALUE 
The theoretical value of a proposition is the price one would expect to pay In order to 
just break even In the long run. Thus far the only factor we have considered In 
determining the value of a proposition ls the expected return. We used this concep~to 
calculate the 95¢ fair price for the roulette bet. There may, however, be O er 
considerations. th In decides to change the conditions 
Suppose that in our roulette example he ca~e°roulette bet for Its expected return of the bet slightly. The player may now pure ase 
1. ulette wheel with 38 slots. In some parts of the world the 
As 1s customary 1n the U.S., we assume a ro course changes the odds. 
roulette wheel may have no slot 00. ThJs of 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36 ChJJplerJ 
to move. If a futures trader and an option trader take long market positions fn theJr 
respective Instruments, and the market does Jn fact move hJgher, the futures trader Is 
assured or a profit whlle the option trader may show a loss. If the market faJJs to move 
sufficiently fast, the favorable directional move may not .be enough to offset the optJon 's 
loss In tlme value. This ls the primary reason speculators generaHy Jose In option 
markets. A speculator usually buys options for their seemingly favorable rtsk/reward 
characteristics (limited risk/unlimited reward). But If he purchases options, not only 
must he be right about market direction, he must also be right about market speed. Only 
lf he ls right on both counts can he expect to make a profit. If predicting the correct 
market direction ls difficult, correctly predicting direction and speed ts probably beyond 
most traders' capa.bllltles. 
The concept of speed ls vital In trading options. It Js so Important that there are 
many option strategies which depend only on the speed of the underlying market and 
not at all on Its direction. Indeed, If a trader ls highly proficient at predicting dlrect1onal 
moves In the underlying market, he ls probably better advised to stick to the underlying 
Instrument. It ls only when he has some feel for the speed component that a trader can 
hope to lntelllgently enter the option market. 
The option trader who wants to Intelligently evaluate the potential profltabJlitY of 
an option trade ls faced with the task of analyzing several different factors. At a 
minimum he must consider: 
1. The price of the underlying contract 
2. The exercise price 
3. The amount of time remaining to expiration 
4. The direction ln which he expects the underlying market to move 
5. The speed at which he expects the underlying market to move 
Ideally, he would like to express each of these factors numerically, feed the 
numbers Into a formula, and derive a value for the option. By comparing the value t? 
Its price ln the marketplace, the trader would then know whether the purchase or sale 
of the option was likely to be profitable. This ls essentially the goal of option evaluation: 
to analyze an option based on the terms of the optJon contract, as well as current market 
conditions and future expectations. 
EXPECTED RETURN 
Suppose we are given the opportunity to roll a six-sided die, and each tlme we roll we 
will receive a dollar amount equal to the number which comes up. Ifwe roll a one, we 
get $1; ifwe roll a two, we get $2; and so on up to six, in which case we get $6. If we 
were to roll the die an Infinite number of times, on average, how much would we expect 
to receive per roll? 
We can calculate the answer using some simple arithmetic. There are six numbers 
which can come up, each wlth equal probabllity. If we add up the six possible outcomes 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

► 
Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models 37 
1 +2+3+4+5+6=21 and divide thls by the slx faces of the die we get 21 /6 = 31/2. That 
ts, on average we can expect to get back $3112 each tlme we roll the die. This Is the 
average, or expected, return. If someone were to charge us for the privilege of rolllng 
the die, what might we be willing to pay? If we purchased the chance to roll the die for 
less than $3112, In the long run we would expect to be winners. If we paid more than 
$3 liz, In the long run we would expect to be losers. And If we paid exactly $31/2, we 
would expect to break even. Note the qualifying phrase "In the long run." The expected 
return of $31/2 Is a reallstlc goal only If we are allowed to roll the die many, many times. 
If we are allowed to roll only once, we cannot count on getting back $3112. Indeed, on 
any one roll It Is Impossible to get back $3½ since no face of the die has exactly 3½ 
spots. Nevertheless, if we pay less than $3½ for even one roll of the die, the laws of 
probability are on our side because we have paid less than the expected return. 
In a similar vein, consider a roulette bet A roulette wheel has 38 slots, numbered 
1 through 36, 0 and 00.1 Suppose a casino allows a player to choose a number. If the 
player's number comes up, he receives $36; If any other number comes up, he receives 
nothing. What Is the expected return from this proposition? There are 38 slots on the 
roulette wheel, each with equal probability, but only one slot wtll return $36 to the 
player. If we divide the one way to win $36 by the 38 slots on the wheel, the result Is 
$36/38 = $.947 4, or about 95¢. A player who pays 95¢ for the privilege of picking a 
number at the roulette table can expect to break about even In the long run. 
Of course, no casino will let a player buy such abet for 95¢. Under those conditions 
the casino would make no profit. In the real world, a player who wants to purchase 
such a bet will have to pay more than the expected return, typically $1. The 5¢ 
difference between the $1 prtce of the bet and the 95¢ expected return represents the 
profit potential, or edge, to the casino. In the long run, for every dollar bet at the roulette 
table, the casino can expect to keep about 5¢. 
Given the above conditions, any player Interested In making a profit would rather 
switch places with the casino so that he could be the house. Then he would have a 5¢ 
edge on his side by selling bets worth 95¢ for $1. Alternatively, the player would like 
to find a casino where he could purchase the bet for less than Its expected return of 95¢, 
perhaps 88¢. Then the player would have a 7 ¢ edge over the casino. 
THEORETICAL VALUE 
The theoretical value of a proposition Is the price one would expect to pay In order to 
just break even In the long run. Thus far the only factor we have considered in 
determining the value of a proposition Is the expected return. We used this concept to 
calculate the 95¢ fair price for the roulette bet. There may, however, be other 
considerations. 
Suppose that in our roulette example the casino decides to change the conditions 
of the bet slightly. The player may now purchase the roulette bet for Its expected return 
1. As Is customary 1n the U.S., we assume a roulette wheel with 38 slots. In some parts of the world the 
roulette wheel may have no slot 00. This of course changes the odds. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

38 
ClllpfU.J 
of 95¢ and, as before, If he loses the castno will Immediately collect hJs 95¢ u d the 
new condltlons , however, If the player wlns the casino wtll send him his s36 :in~n 
In two months. Wlll both the player and the casino still break even on the proposltJo: 
Where did the player get the 95¢ he used to place his bet at the roulette wheel? In 
the Immediate sense he may have taken It out of his pocket But a doser examlnatlo n 
may reveal that he withdrew the money from his savings account prtor to vtsltlng the 
casino. Since he won't receive his wtnnln~ for two months, he WUl have to take Into 
consideration the two months Interest he would have earned had he left the 95¢ tn his 
savings account. If Interest rates are 12% annually ( 1 % per month}, the interest loss Is 
2% x 95¢, or about 2¢. If the player purchases the bet for Its expected return of 95¢, 
he wm stlll be a 2¢ loser because of the cost of carrying a 95¢ debit for two months. 
The casino, on the other hand, wUJ take the 95¢, put It In an Interest-bearing account, 
and at the end of two months coJJect 2¢ In Interest 
Under these new condltJons the theoretical value of the bet Is the expected return 
of 95¢ less the 2¢ carrying cost on the bet, or about 93¢. If a player pays 93¢ for the 
roulette bet today and collects his winnings In two months, neither he nor the casino 
can expect to make any profit In the long run. 
The two most common considerations In a financial Investment are the expected 
return and carrying costs. There may, however, be other considerations . For example, 
suppose the casino decided to send the player a 1 ¢ bonus over the next two months. 
He could then add this addltlonal payment to the previous theoretical value of 93¢ to 
get a new theoretical value of 94¢. This Is slmtlar to the dividend paid to owners of stock 
In a company . And, In fact, dividends are an additional consideration In evaluating 
options on stock. 
Exchanges will perhaps object to the casino analogy. They prefer that optlon trading 
not be thought of as gambling. There ls certainly no desire here to assess the moral 
Implications of either gambling or optlon trading. The fact remains that the same Jaws 
of probablllty which enable a caslno to set the odds for different games of chance are 
the same laws of probablllty which enable a trader to evaluate an optlon. 
The concept of theoretical value based on probabllJty ls common In many aspects 
of business. For those uncomfortable with the gambllng analogy, one can go back to the 
original justlflcatlon for options and thJnk of them as Insurance policies which require 
the payment of a premium. Through the use of statlstlcal data and probablllty theocy, 
an actual)' at an Insurance company will attempt to calculate the llkellhood that the 
Insurance company wlll have to make good on an Insurance policy. He can then factor 
Into the equation what the Insurance company expects to earn on premium payments, 
and thereby arrtve at a theoretlcal value for the Insurance policy. The pollcy can then 
be offered to prospective customers at an additional cost, which represents the theoretl· 
cal edge to the Insurance company. 
In the same way, the goal of option evaluation ls to detennlne, through the use of 
theoretical pricing models, the theoretical value of an option. The trader can then make 
an Intelligent decision whether the option Is overprtced or underprlced In the market· 
place, and whether the theoretical edge ls sufficient to justify going into the marketplace 
and making a trade. ◄ 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--
Introduction to Thtoretlcal Pricing Models J9 
A WORD ON MODE~ 
Before contlnulng, a few obseivatlons on models In general will be worth h 1 A model Is a scaled down or more easily managed representauon f thw I e. 
Th I b h l I h o e real world. e mode may e a P ys ca one, sue as a model airplane or building, or It may be a 
mathematical one, such as a formula. In each case, the model Is constructed to hel us 
better understand the world In which we llve. However, ft ts unwtse, and somedmes 
dangerous, to assume that the model and the real world which ft represents are 
tdentlcal In every way. They may be very similar, but the model Is unlikely to exactly 
duplicate every feature of the real world. 
All models, If they are to be effective, require us to make certain prior assumptions 
about the real world. Mathematical models require the Input of numbers whlch quantify 
these assumptions. If we feed Incorrect data Into the model, we can expect an Incorrect 
representation of the real world. Every model user must be aware: garbage In, garbage 
out. 
These general observations about models are no less true for option pricing models. 
An option model ls only someone's Idea of how options might be evaluated under 
certain conditions. Since either the model Itself, or the data which we feed Into the 
model, might be Incorrect, there Is no guarantee that model-generated values will be 
accurate, nor can we be sure that these values wlll bear any log\cal resemblance to actual 
prices In the marketplace. 
There Is In fact a great deal of disagreement among traders as to the usefulness of 
option pricing models. Some traders feel that models are so much hocus-pocus, and have 
no relationship to what goes on In the real world. Other traders feel that once they have 
a sheet of theoretical values In hand all their problems are solved. The reality lies 
somewhere In between. 
A new option trader Is like someone entering a dark room for the first time. Without 
any guidance he will grope In the dark and may eventually find what he Is looking for. 
The trader who Is armed with a basic understanding of theoretical pricing models enters 
the same room with a small candle. He can make out the general layout of the room, 
but the dimness of the candle prevents him from distinguishing every detail. Moreover, 
some of what he does see may be distorted by the flickering candle. In spite of these 
limitations, a trader Is more likely to find what he ls looking for with a small candle than 
with no !llumlnation at all. 
The real problems with theoretical prtclng models arise after the trader has acquired 
some sophistication. As he gains confidence he may begin to increase the size of his 
trades. When this happens, his lnablllty to make out every detail In the room, as well as 
the distortions caused by the fllckertng candle flame, take on Increased importance. 
Now a misinterpretation of what he thinks he sees can lead to financial disaster, since 
any error In judgement will be greatly magnified. 
The sensible approach ls to make use of a model, but with a full awareness of what 
it can and cannot do. Option traders will find that theoretical pricing models are 
Invaluable tools to understanding the pricing of options. Because of the insights gained 
from a model, the great majority of successful option traders rely on some type of 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

' 
40 
theoreUcal pricing model. However, an optlon trader, If he Is to make the best use of 
theoreUcal pricing model, must be aware of Its llmltatlons as well as Its stren&thsa 
Otherwise he may be no better off than the trader groping In the dark.2 · 
A SIMPLE APPROACH 
How might we adapt the concepts of expected return and theoretlcal value to the 
pricing of opUons? We might begin by calculaUng the expected return for an opu
00 Let's take a simple example. • 
Suppose an underlying contract Is trading at $100 and that on a certain date In the 
future, which we will call expiration, the contract can take on one of five different 
prices: $80, $90, $100, $1 l 0, or $120. Assume, moreover, that each of the five prices 
Is equally Ukely with 20% probability. The prices and probabilities might be represented 
by the line In Agure 3-1. 
If we take a longposltlon In the underlying contract at today's price of $100, what 
will be the expected return from this position at expiration? 20% of the Ume we wtll 
lose $20 when the contract ends up at $80. 20% of the time we wtll lose $1 0 when the 
contract ends up at $90. 20% of the time we will break even when the contract ends 
up at $100. 20% of the time we will make $10 when the contract ends up at $11 0. And 
20% of the time we wlll make $20 when the contract ends up at $120. We can write 
the arithmetic: 
-(20% X $20)-(20% X $10) +(20% X 0) +(20% X $10) +(20% X $20) = 0 
Since the profits and losses exactly offset each other, the expected return to the 
long position Is zero. The same reasoning will show that the expected return to a short 
position taken at the current prtce of $100 Is also zero. Given the prices and prob· 
abilltles, if we take either a long or short position we can expect to just break even In 
the long run. 
Now suppose that we take a long position In a $100 call. Forgetting for a moment 
about what we might pay for the call, what will be the expected return given the prices 
and probablllties In Figure 3-1? If the underlying contract finishes at $80, $90, or $100 
the call wlll expire worthless. If the underlying contract finishes at $110 or $120 the 
call will be worth $10 and $20, respectively. The arithmetic Is: 
(20% X 0) +(20% X 0) +(20% X 0) +(20% X $10) +(20% X $20) = +$6 
Figure 3-1 
$80 $90 $100 $110 $120 
20% 20% 20% 20% 20% 
2. Two .lnterestJng articles discu$ these llmltatlons: 
FlglewskJ, Stephen; "What Does an Optton Pde.Ing Model Tell Us a.bout Option Prices?,• Ftnancfdt 
Ana~Jouma4 September/October 1989, pages 12·15. 
Black, F!Sche.r; "UY.Ing Up to the Model," Risk, Vol. 3, No. 3., March 1990, pages 11 • 13. 
---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Introductio n to 17feoreticAI Prl Ing Mode/J 41 
Th call can never be worth less than zero, so the exp cted r um from the II 
po ttton Is always a non•negauve number, In this case $6. 
If we want to develop a theoretical pricing model using this approach, we might 
propose a series of possible prices and probabilities for the underlV,ng contract a 
expiration. Then, given an exercise price, we can calculate the value of the opUon at 
each price outcome, multiply the value by Its associated probablllty, add up all these 
numbers, and thereby obtain an expected return for the option. 
In the foregoing example we took a very simple situation wtth only five possible 
price outcomes, each with identical probability . What changes might we make In order 
to develop a more realistic model? For one thing, we would have to know the settlement 
procedure for the option. In the United States, all options are subject to stock-type 
settlement, which requires full payment for the option. If the $100 call wm have an 
expected return of $6 at expiration, we wlll have to deduct the carrying costs to get Its 
value today. If interest rates are 12% annually ( 1 % per month) and the option wm expire 
in two months, we will have to discount the $6 expected return by the 2% carrytng 
cost, or about 12¢. The theoretical value of the option wlll then be $5.88. 
What other factors might we have to consider? We assumed that all five prtce 
outcomes were equally likely. Is this a realistic assumption? Suppose you were told that 
only two possible prices were possible at expiration, $110 and $250. With the 
underlying contract at $100 today, which do you think ls more likely? Based on 
experience, most traders would probably agree that extreme price changes which are 
far away from today's price are less likely than small changes which remain close to 
today's price. For this reason, $110 ls more likely than $250. To take this into 
consideration, perhaps our price outcomes, in terms of probability, ought to be concen­
trated around the present price of the underlying contract. Such a distribution ls shown 
In Figure 3-2. Now the expected return from a $100 call is: 
(10% X 0) +(20% X 0) +(40% X 0) +(20% X $10) +(10% X $20) = $4.00 
If, as before, the option ls subject to stock-type settlement and carrying costs are 
2%, the theoretical value of the option will now be $3.92. 
Note that in Figure 3-2 all outcomes and probabilities are arranged symmetrically . 
Even though the new probabilities altered the expected return for the $100 call, the 
expected return from any position taken in the underlying contract ls still zero. For each 
upward price move, there ls a downward move of equal magnitude and probability. We 
might, however, believe that the expected return to an underlying contract ls not zero, 
that there ls a greater chance that the contract will move one direction rather than 
another. Look at the price outcomes and probabilities In Figure 3-3. Using these new 
probabllities, the expected return from a long posltlon in the underlying contract ls: 
-{10% X $20) -(20% X $10) +(30% X 0) +(25% X $10) +(15% X $20) = +$1.50 
and the expected return for the $100 call is: 
(10% X Q) +(20% X 0) +(30% X 0) +(25% X $10) +(15% X $20) = +$5.50 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

42 
~;;;;-;:;------------------- " Figure 3-2 
$80 $90 $100 S1to $120 
10% 20% 40% 20% 10~ 
Figure 3-3 
$80 $90 $100 Stto $120 
10% 20% 30% 25% 15% 
Note that the underlying contract now has a positive expected return so Jt may seem 
that there Is money to .be made simply .by purchasing the underlytn~ contract. ThJs 
would be true If there were no o~er considerations. But suppose the underlying 
contract Is a stock, and therefore subJect to stock-type settlement If we purchase the 
stock at today's prtce of $ 100 and hold It for some period, there ls a carrying cost 
associated with the Investment If the carrying cost ls exactly equal to the expected 
return of $1.50, we will just break even. For a long stock position to be profitable, the 
stock must appreciate by at least the amount of carrying costs over the holding period. 
Therefore, the expected return from the stock must be some posltlve number. If we 
assume that any stock trade wlll just break even, the expected return must be equal to 
the carrying costs. 
Some stocks also pay dividends. If the d!vtdend ls paid during the holding perfod, 
It will affect the expected return. A trader who buys stock will have to pay out carrying 
costs, but he wlll receive the dividends. If we again assume that a stock trade wUJ break 
even, the expected return at the end of the holding period must he tdentJcal to the 
carrying costs less the dividend. If the carrying cost for the stock over some pertod Is 
$3.50, and a $1.00 dividend Is expected during this period, the expected return at the 
end of the period must be $2.50. A trader who purchases the stock today will Incur an 
Interest debit of $3.50 at the end of the holding period, but this will be exactly offset by 
the $1.00 dividend which he receives during the holding perlod,3 as well as the $2.50 
expected return at the end of the period. 
In an arbitrage-free market, where no profit can be made by either buying or selling 
a contract, all credits and debits, Including the expected return, must exactly cancel out 
If we assume an arbitrage-free market, we must necessarily assume that the forward 
price, the average price of the contract at the end of the holding period, is the current 
price, plus an expected return which will exactly offset all other credits and debits. If 
the holding costs on a $100 stock over some period are $4, the forward price must be 
$104. If the stock also pays a $1 dividend, the forward price must be $103. In both 
cases the credits and debits will exactly cancel out. 
The calculation of a forward price depends on the characterlstlcs of the contract as 
well as market conditions. In the case of a stock, the conslderatlons are the price of the 
3. The trader can also earn interest on the diVldend from the tlme he receives it until the end of the holding 
period. Since this will usually be a very small amount in relation to the other factors, we will Jgnore Jt 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-
lnlfOductlon to Theoretical Pricing Models 43 
stock, the length of the holding period, Interest rates, and dividends. In the case of a 
futures contract, the situation ls much simpler. A futures contract requJres no lnJUaJ cash 
outlay, since It Is subject to futures-type settlement. Moreover, a futures contract does 
not pay dMdends. This means that the forward price of a futures contract In an 
arbitrage-free market ls simply the current price of the futures contract If a trader buys 
a futures contract at $100, the break even price for the contract at the end of the holding 
per1od ts $100. 
Going back to our very simple pricing model, we might make the assumption that 
the underlying market ls arbltrage-free,4 that there ls no money to be made from trading 
the underlying contract. The expected return must then be equal to the difference 
between the current price of the underlying market and Its forward price. In the case of 
stock, the expected return will be carrying costs less dividends. In the case of futures, 
the expected return will be zero. 
Even if we assume an arbitrage-free market In the underlying, with appropriate 
probabllltles associated with each price outcome, we stHl have one major problem. In 
our simplified model there were only five possible price outcomes, while In the real 
world there are an Infinite number of posslbllltles. To enable our model to more closely 
approximate real world conditions we will have to construct a probability line wtth 
every possible price outcome and Its associated probablllty. Tots may seem an impossible 
task, but lt is the basis for all theoretical prtclng models. 
We can now summarize the necessary steps in developing a model: 
1. Propose a series of possible prices at expiration for the underlying contract 
2. Assign an appropriate probability to each possible price 
3. Maintain an arbitrage-free underlying market 
4. From the prices and probabllltles ln steps 1, 2, and 3, calculate the expected 
return for the option 
5. From the option's expected return, deduct the carrying cost 
If we can accomplish all thJs, we wm finally have a theoretical value from which we can 
begin to trade. 
Prior to 1973, evaluation of options required the solution of complex mathematical 
equations. Since such methods were slow and tedious, a trader who tried to use them 
quickly found that profit opportunities disappeared faster than the evaluation methods 
could identify them. In 1973, concurrent with the opening of the Chicago Board 
Options Exchange, Fischer Black and Myron Scholes introduced the flrst practical 
theoretical pricing model for options. The Black-Scholes Model, With its relatively 
simple arithmetic and limited number of inputs, most of which were easily observable, 
proved an ideal tool for traders In the newly opened U.S. option market. Although other 
models have since been introduced to overcome some of Its original deficiencies, the 
Black-Scholes Model remains the most widely used of all option pricing models. 
4. We need not neceswily assume an arbitrage·free underlytng market But we shall see that thJs Js an 
important assumption in most theoretical pricing models. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I 44 
In Its original form, the Black-Scholes Model was Intended to evaluate European 
optlons (no early exercise permitted) on non-dividend paying stocks. Shortly after Its 
lntroductlon, realizing that most stocks do pay dividends, Black and Scholes added a 
dlvidend component. In 1976, Fischer Black made slight modifications to the model to 
allow for the evaluatlon of options on futures contracts. And In 1983, Mark Garman 
and Steven Kohlhagen made several other modifications to allow for the evaluation of 
options on foreign currencies. 5 The futures version and the foreign currency version are 
known officially as the Black Model and the Garman•Kohlhagen Model, respectively. 
But the evaluation method In each version, whether the or1glnal Black-Scholes Model 
for stock options, the Black Model for futures options, or the Garman•Kohlhagen Model 
for foreign currency options, Is so similar that they have all come to be known as simply 
the Black·Scholes Model. The various forms of the model differ prtmarlly In how they 
calculate the forward price of the underlying contract, and an option trader wlll simply 
choose the form appropriate to the underlying Instrument. 
The great majority of options currently traded are Amer1can options, carrying with 
them the right of early exercise. For this reason, It may seem that the Black-Scholes 
model, with Its assumption of no early exercise, ls poorly suited for use In most markets. 
However, the Black-Scholes Model has proven so easy to use that many traders do not 
bell eve the more accurate values derived from an American option prtclng model, which 
allows for the posslblllty of early exercise, Is worth the additional effort. In some 
markets, pantcularly futures options markets, the additional early exercise value ls so 
small that there ls virtually no difference between values obtained from the Black· 
Scholes model and values obtained from an Amertcan pricing model. 
Due to Its widespread use and Its importance In the development of other pricing 
models, we will for the moment restrict ourselves to a discussion of the Black-Scholes 
model and Its various forms. In later chapters we wlll consider the question of early 
exercise. We will also look at alternative methods for prtclng options when we question 
some of the basic assumptions In the Black-Scholes Model. 
The reasoning which led to the development of the Black-Scholes Model depends 
on the five steps we listed earlier in this chapter when we proposed a simple method 
for evaluating options. Black and Scholes worked originally with call values, but put 
values can be derived In much the same way. Alternatively, we will see In Chapter 11 
that In an art>ltrage-free market there ls a unique relationship between an underlying 
contract, and a call and put with the same exercise price and expiration date. This 
relationship enables us to derive a put value simply by knowing the associated call value. 
In order to calculate an option's theoretical value using the Black-Scholes Model, 
we need to know at a minimum five characteristics of the option and Its underlying 
contract These are: 
1. The option's exercise price 
2. The amount of time remaining to expiration 
5. We are speaking here of options on a physical foreign currency, rather than options on a fore!gn 
currency futures contract The latter may be evaluated using the Black Model for futures options. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Introduction to Theoretical Pricing Models 
3. The current price of the underlying contract 
4. The rlsk·free Interest rate over the llfe of the optlon 
s. The volatility of the underlying contract 45 
The last Input, volatlllty, may be unfamlllar to the new trader. Whlle we wlll put 
off a detailed discussion of this Input to the next chapter, from our previous dlscusslon 
one can reasonably Infer that volatlllty ls related to the speed or the market. 
If we know each of the required inputs, we can feed them into the theoretical 
pricing model and thereby generate a theoretical value. 
Black and Scholes also Incorporated into their model the concept of the rtskless 
hedge. For every option position there ls a theoretically equivalent position In the 
underlying contract such that, for small prtce changes In the underlying contract, the 
option position wlll gain or lose value at exactly the same rate as the underlying position. 
To take advantage of a theoretically mlsprlced option, It ls necessary to establish a hedge 
by offsetting the option position with this theoretically equivalent underlying position. 
That ts, whatever option posltlon we take, we must take an opposing market posltlon 
in the underlying contract. The correct proportion of underlying contracts needed to 
establlsh this rlskless hedge ls known as the hedge ratio. 
Why is lt necessary to establish a rlskless hedge? Recall that in our simplified 
approach an option's theoretical value depended on the probabUlty of various prtce 
outcomes for the underlying contract. As the underlying contract changes In price, the 
probabillty of each outcome wlll also change. If the underlying price ls currently $100 
and we assign a 25% probabillty to $120, we might drop the probability for $120 to 
10% if the prtce of the underlying contract falls to $80. By initially establlshlnga rtskless 
hedge, and then by adjusting this hedge as market conditions change, we are taking Into 
consideration these changing probabllltles. 
In this sense an option can be thought of as a substitute for a similar position ln the 
underlying contract. A call ls a substitute for a long position; a put ls a substitute for a 
short position. Whether it is better to take the position in the option or in the underlying 
Figure 3-4 
Exercise Price 
Time to Expiration 
Underlying Price 
Interest Rates 
Volatlllty Theoretical ----- ►► Theoretical ~-- --111~ Pricing Model Value 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

46 ChlpttrJ 
contract depends on the theoretical value of the option and Its price In the marketplace. 
If a call can be purchased (sold) for less (more) than Its theorettcaJ value, It will, Jn the 
long run, be more profitable to take a long (short) market pos!Uon by purchasing (sellfng) 
calls than by purchasing (selling) the underlying contract In the same way, lf a put can 
be purchased (sold) for less (more) than Its theoretical value, It WUI, In the long run, be 
more profitable to take a short (long) market position by purchasing (selling) puts than 
by selllng lbuytn~ the underlying contract 
Since the theoretical value obtained from a theoretlcal pricing model Is no better 
than the Inputs Into the model, a few comments on each of the Inputs wtll be 
worthwhile. 
EXERCISE PRICE 
There ought never be any doubt about the exercise prtce of an option, since It Is fixed 
In the tenns of the contract and does not vary over the life of the contract 6 A 
Deutsehemark March 58 call traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange cannot 
suddenly tum Into March 59 call or a March 57 call. AA IBM July 55 put traded on the 
Chicago Board Options Exchange cannot tum Into a July 50 put or a July 60 put 
TIME TO EXPIRATION 
Uke the exercise price, the option's expiration date Is fixed and will not vary. Our OM 
March 58 call wlll not suddenly tum Into an April 58 call, nor wtll our IBM July 55 put 
turn Into a June 55 put Of course, each day that passes brings us closer to expiration, 
so In that sense the time to expiration Is constantly growing shorter. However, the 
expiration date, like the exercise price, Is fixed by the exchange and wtll not change. 
Time to expiration, like all Inputs In the Black-Scholes Model, ts entered as an 
annualized number. If we are entering raw data directly into the model we must make 
the appropriate annuallzation. With 91 days remaining to expiration, we would enter 
an input of .25 (91/365 = .25). With 36 days remaining, we would enter .10 (36/365 
= .10). However, most option evaluation computer programs already have this transfor· 
matlon lncoIJ)Orated Into the software so that we need only enter the correct number 
of days remaining to expiration. 
It may seem that we have a problem In deciding what number of days to enter Into 
the model. We need the amount of time remaining to expiration for two purposes, to 
calculate the Interest considerations and to calculate the llkellhood of movement In the 
underlying contract For volatility purposes In assessing the "speed" of the market we 
are only interested In trading days. Only on those days can the price of the underlying 
contract actually change. This might lead us to drop weekends and holidays from our 
calculations. On the other hand, for Interest rate purposes we must Include every day. 
6. It ts true that an exchange may adjust the exercise pdce of a stock opUon 1f there fs a stock splll ln 
practtcal tenns this ts not really a change 1n the exercise pdce because the ex 
same reJatJonshlp to the stock prtce. The charactertsttcs of th tl erdse price retains the 
unchanged. e op on contract remain ~tlally l 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Introduction to Thtorttic,/ Prlclfll Modtls 47 
lf we borrow or lend money we expect the Interest to accrue every day, no matter that 
some of the days are not business days. 
It turns out that this Is not really a problem. In calculating the 11speed" of the market 
we observe only the prtce changes that occur on business days. But we can make slight 
changes to this observed value and annualize the number before feeding It tnto the 
theoretical pricing model. The result Is that we can feed lnto our model the actual 
number of days remaining to expiration knowing that the model wm Interpret the 
number correctly. 
PRICE OF THE UNDERLYING 
Unlike the exercise prtce and tlme to expiration, the correct price of the underlying ls 
not always obvious. At any one time there Is usually a bid price and an asked price, and 
It may not be clear whether we ought to use one or the other of these prices, or perhaps 
some price In between. 
We have noted that the correct use of an option's theoretical value requires us to 
hedge the optlon position with an opposing trade In the underlying contract Therefore 
the underlying price we feed lnto our theoretical prtclng model ought to be the price at 
which we belleve we can make the opposing trade. If we Intend to purchase calls or sell 
puts, both of which are long market positions, we will have to hedge by selling the 
underlying contract In that case we ought to use the bid price since that ls the price at 
which we can sell the underlying. On the other hand, If we Intend to sell calls or buy 
puts, both of which are short market positions, we will have to hedge by purchasing the 
underlying contract Now we ought to use the asked prtce since that ls the price at 
which we can buy the underlying. 
In practice, the bid and offer are constantly changtng, and many traders will simply 
use the last trade prtce as the basis for theoretical evaluation. But the last trade prtce 
may not always reflect the present market Even the settlement price quoted In a 
newspaper may not accurately reflect the market at the close of business. The last trade 
price may show 751/4 for a contract, but the market at the close may have been 751/4 
bid, 751;2 offered. A trader who hoped to buy at 751/4 would have very little chance of 
being filled because of the difficulty of buying at the bid price. Even a purchase at some 
middle prtce, say 7 53;8, may be unlikely If the market is very unbalanced with many 
more contracts being bid for at 751;4 than offered at 751/2. For all of these reasons, an 
experienced trader will rarely enter an option market without knowing the exact bid 
and off er In the underlying market. 
INTEREST RATES 
ult In either a cash credit or debit to a trader's account, 
Since an option trade may res from this cash flow must also play a role In optlon 
the Interest considerations resulting tes over the life of the optlon. 
evaluation. This ls a function of lntereSt ra les In the theoretical evaluation of options. 
The interest rate component plays tw~ ~e underlying contract. If the underlying 
First, it may affect the forward prtce o 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48 Chlp(tr J 
contract Is subject to stock•type settlement, as we raise Interest rates we raise the 
forward price, Increasing the value of calls and decreasing the value of puts. Secondly, 
the Interest rate may affect the cost of carrying the optlon. If the optlon Is subject to 
stock•type settlement, as we raise Interest rates we decrease the value of the optJon. In 
spite or the fact that the Interest rate plays two roles, In most cases the same rate Is 
applicable and we need only Input one interest rate Into the model. If, however, 
different rates are applicable, such as would be the case with foreign currency optJons 
(the foreign currency Interest rate plays one role, the domestic currency Interest rate 
plays a different role) the model wlll require the Input of two Interest rates. This Is the 
case with the Gannan•Kohlhagen version of the Black-Scholes Model. 
The fact that Interest rates play a dual role also means that the relative Importance 
of Interest rates will vary, depending on the type of underlying Instrument and the 
settlement procedure. For example, Interest rates have a much greater Impact on the 
value of stock optlons than on futures options. As we raise Interest rates, we Increase 
the forward pnce of stock, but leave the foiward price of a futures contract unchanged. 
At the same time, assuming stock•type settlement, as we raise Interest rates we decrease 
the value of options. The optlon price, however, Is usually very small In relation to the 
price of the underlying contract. 
What Interest rate should a trader use when evaluating optlons? Most traders 
cannot borrow and lend at the same rate, so the correct Interest rate will, In theory, 
depend on whether the trade will create a debit or a credit. In the former case the trader 
will be Interested In the borrowing rate, while In the latter case he will be Interested In 
the lending rate. In practice, however, the most common solutlon Is to use the risk-free 
Interest rate, I.e., the most secure rate. In the United States, the government Is usually 
considered the most secure borrower of funds, so that the yield on a government 
security with a term equJvalent to the life of the optlon Is the general benchmark. For a 
60-day option, use the yield on a 60-day treasury blll; for a 180-day option, use the yield 
on a 180-day treasury bill. 
DMDENDS 
We did not list dividends as an Input In Figure 3-4 since they are only a factor in the 
theoretical evaluation of stock optlons, and then only If the stock Is expected to pay a 
dividend over the life of the optlon. 
In order to accurately evaluate a stock optlon, a trader must know both the amount 
of the dividend which the stock will pay and the ex-dividend date, the date on which a 
trader must own the stock In order to receive the dividend. The emphasis here Is on 
ownership of the stock. A deeply ln·the-money option may have many of the same 
characteristics as stock, but only ownership of the stock carries with It the right to collect 
the dividend. 
In the absence of other Information, most traders tend to assume that a company 
will contlnue the same dividend policy It has had In the past. If the company has been 
paying a 75¢ dividend each quarter, It will probably continue to do so. However, this 
Is not always a certainty. Companies sometimes Increase or decrease dividends, and l 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lntrodudlon to Thtorttlcal Prtcln, Modt& 49 
occasionally omit them completely. If there Is the posslblllty or a change In a company's 
dividend policy, a trader has to consider lts Impact on optlon values. Addltlonally, If the 
ex-dtvtdend date ls expected Just prior to expiration, there Is the danger that a delay of 
several days wlll cause the ex•dlvldend date to fall after explratlon. For purposes of 
option evaluation, this Is the same as eliminating the dlvtdend completely. In such a 
situation a trader ought to make a special effort to ascertain the exact ex·dlvldend date. 
VOLATILITY 
Of all the Inputs required for optlon evaluation, volatlllty is the most dlfflcult for traders 
to understand. At the same tlme, volatlllty often plays the most Important role ln actual 
trading sltuatlons. Changes ln our assumptions about volatlllty can have a dramatlc 
effect on an option's value, and the manner In which the marketplace assesses volatlllty 
can have an equally dramatlc effect on an option's prtce. For these reasons, we wlll 
devote the next chapter to a detalled discussion of volatlllty. 