Early Exercise 
of American Options 
Thus far we have assumed that all option strategies involve holding a position to 
expiration. Since the great majortty of exchange traded options are American, canying 
with them the right of early exercise, it wlll be worthwhlle to consider some of the 
characteristics of American options. Specifically, we wlll want to answer two questions: 
1. Given the opportunity, under what circumstances mlght a trader consider 
exercising an American option prior to expiration? 
2. How much more should a trader be wllllng to pay for an American optlon over 
an equivalent European option? 
In order for early exercise to be desirable, there must be some positive cash now 
whlch will result from early exercise, and the value of this cash must be greater than 
the insurance value of the option. Because the cash flow which results from the exercise 
of a stock option ls slgnlflcantly different from the cash now which results from the 
exercise of a futures option, the conditions under which early exercise wm be desirable 
are different. For this reason, we will look at these two situations separately. 
FUTURES OPTIONS 
From previous discussions (see Chapter 6) we know that In evaluating an option there 
are some factors which make the option more valuable and there are some factors whJch 
make the option less valuable. Consider a futures option. We might list the factors which 
affect lts value as follows: 
option value = lntrtnslc value + volatility value -Interest rate value 
Since the Intrinsic value and volatlllty components can never be less than zero, these 
factors always enhance the option's value. As either rises, the option value rises. Only 
the Interest rate component mlght affect the option's value negatively. As Interest 
considerations rise, the option's value falls. If the negative effects of interest rates are 
greater than the positive effects of volatility, it might be possible for an option, if it ls 
241 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

242 
European, to be worth less than par1ty.1 In such a case, If the optJon were an Amt11'41) 
optlon lt would become an early exercise candidate. 
For example, suppose a certain futures contract Is trading at 1 OO. Suppose al$0 ~ 
we own an 80 call which wtll expire In two months, and that thJs optJon ts subject~ 
stock-type settlement When we evaluate the opUon, we find that Jt has a theoretJc.i 
value of 20 and a delta of 100. This means that the optlon has essentJally the samt 
characteristics as the futures contract. If the option ls Amertcan, and we want to 
maintain the same delta position, we have three possible choices: 
1. Hold the optlon 
2. Exercise the opUon 
3. Sell the option and buy a futures contract 
Which of these choices ls best? 
If we choose the first alternative and hold the position, there Is no change w our 
account. The position we take home ts Identical to the one with which we begin the 
next trading day. 
If we choose the second alternative and exercise the 80 call, It ls as If we had gone 
lnto the futures market and purchased a futures contract at 80. Since we now tiave a 
futures position, we are subject to futures-type settlement. If the futures contract which 
we purchased at 80 settles at 100, 20 points wlll be credited to our account-20 points 
on which we can earn interest. How much Interest will we earn? That depends on the 
level of Interest rates as well as the amount of tlme remaining to expiration. If Interest 
rates are 6%, with two months remaining to expiration, we wlll earn: 
20 X 2/12 X 6% = .20 
Through early exercise of the optlon we will earn an additional .20 In Interest over the 
time remaining to expiration. Since no trader wants to throw away an additional profit, 
exercising the optJon early makes better sense than simply holding the posltton. 
What about the third choice, selllng the option ourselves and buying a futures 
contract? If the 80 call ls trading at exactly Its Intrinsic value of 20 points, there ls no 
difference between exercising the call, or selllng the call and buying a futures contract. 
Both strategies will result In a 20-polnt credit, and over the time remaining to expiration 
we wlll earn the same Interest of .20. But suppose the 80 call ls trading at a price other 
than 20. Suppose It ls trading at 19.50. Clearly, thJs prlce ls not possible In a market 
where the options are Amertcan and can be exercised at any time. Purchasing an 80 
call for 19.50 Is equivalent to purchaslng the futures contract for 99.50. If the futures 
contract ls tradlng at I 00, this means the caJJ Is trading at less than parity. If this were 
Indeed true, all traders would buy the call, sell the futures contract, and Immediately 
exercise the call. This would result In a rlskless profit of .50, the amount by which the 
t. Note that a European option With a theoretical value I~ than parity will have a postUve theta. Its value 
wtll gradually rise to parity as exptratlon approaches. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

£Mt' Exercise of Amerlan Options 24J 
option was below parity. In a market where options are subJect to early exercise, oo 
option ought to be trading at less than partty. 
What lf the option ls trading for more than parity, say 20.507 If we sell the 80 call 
for 20.50 and buy the futures contract for 100, we wlll have the same position we would 
have had through early exercise. But now, instead 20 points, we will have 20.50 points 
credited to our account. We will realize an additional profit of .50 through the sale of 
the option, as well as the slight additional Interest eamtn~ which go wtth It 
A trader who exercises a futures option early does so to capture the interest on the 
option's intrlnslc value. Thls intrinsic value will be credited to his account only lf the 
option ls subject to stock-type settlement When he abandons the option through 
exercise, he receives the variation resulting from settlement of the futures contract H, 
however, futures options are subject to futures-type settlement, as they are on many 
non-U .S. exchanges, no cash flow results from the early exercise of an option. With an 
80 call trading at 20 and the underlying futures contract trading at 100, If the option ls 
subject to futures-type settlement when exercised, 20 points will be credited to the 
trader's account from the settlement of the futures contract But 20 points will 
simultaneously be debited from his account when the 20-point value of the option 
dlsappears. Since the cash credits and debits exactly offset each other, no additional 
interest eamln~ can accrue. 
In futures markets where the options are subject to futures-type settlement there ls 
never any economic justlflcatlon for early exercise, and early exercise can never be an 
optimal choice. A trader wm always be better off either holding the option or selling lt, 
rather than exercising lt early. 
STOCK OPTIONS 
Early Exercise of Calla for the Dividends 
We can separate a stock option call lnto lts components, as we did wtth a futures option. 
Now we have the additional conslderatlon of dlvtdends: 
call value = lntrlnslc value + interest rate value + volatility value -dividend value 
Since the lntrlnslc value, interest rate, and volatility components can never be less than 
zero, these factors always enhance the call's value. As any one of them rtses, the call 
value rises. Only the dlvldend component might affect the option's value negatively. As 
the dividend rises, the call option's value falls. If the underlying stock pays no divldend, 
or no dividend ls expected prior to explratlon of the option, a call option can never have 
a value less than parity (lntrlnslc value). If, however, the negative effects of the dlvldend 
are greater than the positive effects of interest rates and volatlllty, lt might be possible 
for a call, If It Is European, to be worth less than parity. 
For example, suppose a certain stock ls trading at t 00 and that the stock will go 
ex-dividend two points tomorrow. Suppose also that there ts a 90 call available which 
wUI expire 1n two weeks. When we evaluate the optlon, we find that lt has a theoretical 
value of 1 o and a delta of 100. Thls means that the optlon has essentially the same 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7 244 ClupU,11 
characteristics as the stock. If the optlon Is American, and we want to malntaJn the~ 
delta position, we have three possible choices: • 
t . Hold the option 
2. Exercise the option 
3. Sell the option and buy stock 
Which of these choices Is best? 
Suppose we simply hold the optlon. Certainly we will maintain our delta positlo 
But what will happen tomorrow when the stock gives up Its dividend? If the stock OJ>en$ 
unchanged, it will open ex·dlvidend at 98, 2 since the two-point dMdend will be 
deducted from Its price. Since the option has a value of parity, It will open not at JO, 
the previous day's parity price, but at 8, today's parity price. In other words, ff we hold 
the option we can be certain of losing two points on our posltlon. 
Can we do any better with the second choice, exercising the option? If we exercise 
the option, we will pay the exercise price of 90 for the stock, and we will discard the 
t O-polnt value of the option, effectively purchasing the stock at 100. When the stock 
goes ex-dividend we will lose two points when It opens two points lower the next day, 
but we will also receive the dividend since we now own the stock. We wlll break even 
because the two-point loss on the stock price will be offset by the two-point dividend 
we receive. Clearly, we are better off exercising the option than holding It, not because 
we will show some additional profit, but because we will avoid a two-point loss. We 
must exercise the option to ensure that we break even. 
What about the third choice, selllng the option and buying stock ourselves? This 
seems to be very similar to early exercise. In both cases we are replacing the option with 
the stock. If the option ls trading at parity, In this case 1 O, there ls no difference between 
exercising the option, or selling the option and buying the stock. In each case the cash 
flow will be ldentlcal and we wlll own the stock when it goes ex-dividend. But suppose 
the 90 call ls trading at a price other than 10. Suppose, for example, it is trading at 
91/2. Clearly, this price Is not possible In a market where the options are American and 
can be exercised at any time. Purchasing a 90 call for 91/2 Is equivalent to purchasing 
the stock for 991,1. If the stock ls trading at I 00, this means the call ls trading at less 
than parity. If thls were Indeed true, all traders would buy the call, sell the stock, and 
Immediately exercise the call. This would result In a rlskless profit of 1/2 point, the 
amount by whlch the option was below parity. In a market where options are subject 
to early exercise, no option ought to be trading at Jess than parity. 
What If the 90 call ls trading for more than parity, say 10 l/2? Now if we sell the 
option and purchase the stock we will still receive the dividend, since we will own the 
stock. But we will end up with an additional ½ point which we would not have 
2• On the day a stock gives up Its dividend, prices are typically d 
deducted from the stock's price. Hence, a J OO·polnt 1i5emlnated With the dtvtdend already 
and opens the next day at 98 would be deemed to stock which g1ves up a 2-po!nt dtvtdend ovemJgbt 
Jts prJce results from the dlvldend payout not fro have hopened unchanged stnce the 2·Polnt drop tn 
' m any c ange 1n 1nvestor demand. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

~ Exfrcttt of Amtrlan Options 245 
collected through exercise of the call. Therefore, our thlrd choice, selling the call and 
buy\ng the stock, Is the optimum choice. 
Smee the only reason a trader would ever consider exerclslng astock option call 
early ls to receive the dividend, If a stock pays no dividend there lsno reason to exercise 
a call early. If the stock does pay a dividend, the only tlme a trader ought to consider 
early exercise ls the day before the stock goes ex-dlvldend. At no other time In Jts Ufe ls 
a stock option call an early exercise candidate. 
We noted that in an American (exercise) market an optlon should never trade at 
less than parity. ls the same true in a European (exercise) market? In our example of 
the 90 call and stock at 100, with an expected two-point dividend, the call prtce Will 
clearly drop when the stock goes ex-dividend. If the optlon cannot be turned Into stock 
through exercise prior to the ex-dividend date, the option ls clearly going to lose value. 
If lt has very llttle tlme value, the amount lt wlll lose when the dividend ls given up may 
make the option worth less than parity. In our example, If the option expires In two 
weeks with interest rates at 8% and a volatility of 20%, the European value or the 90 
call ls approximately 81/4. This ls 13/4 under partty, due to the fact that a call option, no 
matter how deeply in-the-money, does not carry with It the right to the dividend. Only 
ownership of the stock carries that right 
Early Exerdse of Puts for Interest 
As we dld with a stock option call, we can express a stock option put's value In terms 
of lts components: 
put value = Intrinsic value -Interest rate value + volatility value+ dlvldend value 
In the case of a put, the only component that affects Its value negatively ls the Interest 
rate component. If the negative effects of Interest rates are greater than the positive 
effects of volatility and dividends, lt mlght be possible for a put, if it ls European, to be 
worth less than parity. Consider thls sltuatlon: 
Stock price = 100, Tlme to expiration = 8 weeks, Volatlllty = 20% 
Interest rate = 8.00%, Dividend = 0 
With these assumptions, the value of a 110 call ls approximately .70. Using the put/call 
parity relatlonshlp, we can calculate the value of the 110 put: 
put value = call value + exercise price -stock price -carrying costs 
The carrying costs on the exercise prtce of 110 are: 
110 X 56/365 X 8% = 1 .35 
The European put value ls therefore: 
.70 + 110-100-1.35 = 9.35 
Since the 11 o put ls only worth 9 .35 If we hold It to expiration, but ls worth 1 0 points 
If we exercise ft today, the optlon Is apparently worth more dead (exercised) than allve 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

246 Clupltr 12 
(unexerclsed). When we exercise the I 00 put we get to sell stock at 11 o and we can 
earn Interest on this 11 0·polnt credit to explratlon. ' 
Whereas a stock optlon call can only be an early exercise candidate on the day prlor 
to the stock's ex·dlvtdend date, a stock option put can become an early exerdft 
candidate anytime the Interest which can be earned through the sale of the stock at tht 
exercise prlce Is sufficiently large. Detennlnlng exactly when this happens 1s a difficult 
problem, but Jf the stock pays a dividend It Is most likely to occur on the day after the 
stock goes ex·d!Vldend. Since a put Is a substitute for a short stock pos!Uon, one of the 
advantages of holding a put Is to avoid pa~ng the dividend. Hence, a trader will almost 
always want to hold the put through the ex-dividend date. Then, If the Interest 
conslderatlons are sufficient, the trader will exercise his put 
In an American (early exercise) market no put option can be trading at less than 
parll}'. Otherwise there Is an Immediate art>ltrage opportunity available by purcha.SJng 
the stock, purchasing the put, and Immediately exercising the put The profit wtU be 
equal to the amount by which the put Is trading at less than parity. This Is not necessartJy 
true In a European (no early exercise) market, where the option must be carried to 
exptratlon. In our example of the 110 put where the theoretical value derived from the 
call price was 9.35 (.65 less than parity), the market In the European 11 o put might be 
91;4.91/2. A market maker ls willing to sell the optlon at 91~ I'~ less than parity) because 
he can hedge himself by selling stock, and he will be confident In the knowledge that 
he will not be required to buy back the stock untll expiration. The Interest he earns on 
the stock to expiration will more than offset the amount he will lose by selllng the put 
below parity. 
Conditions for Early Exercise 
If gtven the chance, there are clearly reasons why a trader might want to exercise an 
American optlon early. In the case of futures options, when the option Is subject to 
stock-type settlement, the trader Is trying to capture the Interest on the option's Intrinsic 
value. In the case of stock option caJls, he ls trying to capture the dividend which the 
stock pays. In the case of stock option puts, he Is trying to capture the Interest on the 
proceeds from the sale of the stock at the exercise price. From the foregoing discussion 
we can Infer two conditions which are necessary before a trader considers exercising an 
option early to capture this additional profit: 
1. The option must be trading at parity. 
2. The option must have a delta close to 100. 
If the option Is trading at more than parity, the trader will always do better selllng 
the option and taking a position In the underlylng market himself. Determlnlng whether 
an option Is trading at parity Is simply a matter of finding out what the market Jn that 
option Is. In the great major1ty of cases, If an option Is deeply enough In-the-money to 
be an early exercise candidate, the bid/ask spread ls probably so wide that for practical 
purposes the option Is trading at partty. l 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

,.. Jlfltrtcan UJJUVIU ~~eo/1111• 247 
Why shOuld the delta be close to 100? If we exercise an opuon early, we are trading 
ln the opuon for a posltlon In the underlying contract We therefore want to be 
rusonably certain that the option and the underlying contract have the same charac· 
ttrtstlcs. In other words, we want to be certain that the opuon has no add!tlonaJ 
insurance value left, so that when we exercise the optlon we are not throwtng away 
thiS tnsurance value. 
For example, suppose there ls an 80 call available wtth the underlying contract 
uadlng at 100. lf we want to take a long posttlon we can purchase either the 80 caJI or 
the underlying contract If we feel there ls no chance that the market can fall below 80 
prior to expiration, there ls no difference between holding the 80 calJ or holding the 
underlying contract But suppose we feel that there Is some chance that the market 
could fall below 80. In that case we will prefer to hold the 80 call. If the market were 
to fall below 80, holding the call would limit our potential loss to the option's premium. 
lf, however, we hold a long underlying position and the market drops below 80, our 
p>tentlal loss Is unllmlted. 
Recall that one lnteipretatlon of the delta Is the probablllty that the option will finJsh 
tn•the-money. A delta dose to 100 means that the underlying market has almost no 
chance of going through the exercise price, and the option therefore has almost no 
chance of going out-of-the-money. 
What degree of certainty justifies early exercise? With a delta of l 00 one certainly 
would consider early exercise. What about 997 967 907 With a delta above 95, many 
traders will at least consider early exercise. How much Interest wlll be earned, or what 
dlvtdend will be collected, through early exercise? With a delta of 95 or lower, the risk 
ls probably too great to consider early exercise. There ls at least a 5% chance that the 
underlying market will go through the exercise prtce. If that happens, a trader will regret 
havtng exercised an option early, regardless of the additional benefits to be gained 
through early exercise. 
By ensuring that the delta Is close to 100, we are also ensuring that we do not throw 
away any Insurance value that the option might still retain. As an option goes more 
deeply Into-the-money, Its tlme value (Insurance value) begtns to disappear. With a delta 
of t 00, In theory the option has no time value let However, as the delta declines, the 
time value Increases. If the delta were significantly less than 100, the option would still 
retain a slgnlflcant amount of time value. If we were to exercise such an option, we 
would be throwing away this Insurance value. , 
Since the desirability of early exercise ls dependent, at least ln part, on the option s 
delta the accuracy of the delta Is Important But there are many factors which affect the 
delta1 and we might Incorrectly assess any one of these factors. If we feel that the correct 
volatility ls 15% an option might have a delta of 98. But If we decide to raise our 
volatility to 17%11 
the delta of the option wlll decline. Under the new cond1tions 1~ del~ 
might only be 93 At a 15% volatility a trader might consider early exercise, whl e at 
17% volatility h~ might not For this reason, optlo~
0:~tll\;;~~~~~: markets are 
exercised early much more often than options In high 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

248 Ou/XtrJJ 
In the same way, an option with three months remalnlng to expJratlon mJf)lt ~ 
a delta of 92, and would therefore not be an early exercise candidate. But If two ~4 
pass, and the prtce of the underl~ng contract ls unchanged, the delra wJIJ r1se, and~ 
new delta might be 99. With three months remaining the opuon was not an ~ 
exercise candidate, but with one month remaining the opuon might be early ex~ 
candidate. 
Of course, we ought to ask why we were considering early exerclSe Jn the ~ 
place. In many cases, we exercise to earn Interest over the life of the optlon. We CcJ1 
earn more Interest over three months than over one month, so from this point of v1et 
a three-month option Is more likely to be an early exercise candidate than a one-month 
optlon. We can see that many factors affect the deslrablllty of early exercise, and the!e 
factors can pull In different dlrectlons, with some factors dictating for early exercise and 
some dictating against. 
Thus far we have only addressed the question of when a trader might fmd It 
desirable to exercise an optlon early. There should be an additional value associated 
with an American optlon over an Identical European optlon because the Amer1an 
option carries with It additional rights. Even an out-of-the-money option, which no one 
would consider exercising today, might someday go deeply enough Into-the-money so 
that It could become an early exercise candidate. This posslblllty should always make 
an American option more valuable than a European option. 
How much more should a trader be willing to pay for an American option over an 
Identical European option? The Black-Scholes model makes no attempt to answer th1s 
question since It Is a European pricing model. In spite of the fact that Black-Scholes 
generated values are likely to show some Inaccuracies In an American market, for many 
years traders continued to use the model because no model with equal ease of use 
existed to evaluate American options. The problem of early exercise was dealt with 
through Intuition, or through slight adjustments to Black-Scholes generated values. For 
example, when a stock ls expected to pay a dividend, an American call value can be 
approximated by comparing the Black·Scholes value of the call option under two 
circumstances: 
I. The call expires the day before the stock goes ex-dividend. 
2. The call expires on Its customary date, but the underlying stock price used to 
evaluate the call Is the current price less the expected dividend. 
Whichever value ls greater Is the pseudo-American call value. 
In the case of options on futures, or of put options on stock traders used 
Black-Scholes generated values, but raised any option with a th ti 11 
1 1 th parity to exactly parity. eore ca va ue ess an 
Th Mode!rf ntually were developed to more accurately evaluate American optlons 
Coe m~st h e RY used of these are the Cox•Ross•Rubensteln model, developed by Joh~ 
x, ep en oss, and Mark Rubenstein· and the Wh 1 Giovanni Barone·Adesl and Robert Whaley Unlike the Bl ka Seyhmlodel, developed by • ac • c o es model, neither of 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E,ey ExercLse of American Options 249 
mese models ls closed fonn. One can't simply sit down and add up all the numbers to 
get the correct value. Rather, both models are algorithms, or loops, and each Ume the 
user makes a pass through the loop, the closer he comes to the true American value of 
the option. While the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model Is quite easy to understand, both 
1ntu1tlvely and mathemaucally, It may require numerous passes through the loop to 
generate an acceptable value. On the other hand, the Whaley model Is more complex 
mathematically, but converges to an acceptable value much more quJckly. The Cox­
Ross-Rubensteln model may require 40 or 50 passes through the loop to reach the same 
degree of accuracy as the Whaley model achieves with four or five passes through the 
loop. In addition to evaluating American options, both models also detennlne when an 
option should be exercised early. We were somewhat vague on this point In our earlier 
dlscusslon, stating that the delta of an option should be close to 100 to justify early 
exercise. When using a true American model, an option Is optimally exercised early 
when Its theoretical value Is exactly parity and lts delta Is exactly 100. 
While the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein and Whaley models In most cases generate similar 
values, more and more computer services are using the Whaley model to evaluate 
Amertcan options because of the speed with which It can achieve results. However, the 
Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model, while slower, ls still very widely used because It offers 
some advantages which are not available In the Whaley model. For example, the 
Whaley model handles the dlvldend payout of a stock as If It were a continuous Interest 
payment over the life of the option. In reality dividends are paid all at once, and the 
Cox-Ross-Rubenstein model more accurately reflects the Impact of thls one-tlme pay­
ment on a call option on the stock. Unlike the Whaley model, the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein 
model can also be used to evaluate some of the recently Introduced, exotic options. Such 
options are path dependent since their value depends not only on the llkely prtce 
distribution of the underlying contract at explratlon, but also on the various pathS which 
the underlying price might take to achieve that dlstrtbutlon. Both these models are 
discussed further In Appendix B. 
Regardless of the model a trader chooses, the accuracy of model-generated values 
wlll depend at least as much on the Inputs Into the model as the theoretical accuracy of 
the model Itself. If a trader evaluates an American option using an Incorrect volatility, 
or an Incorrect Interest rate, or an Incorrect underlying price, the fact that he derives 
his values from an American rather than a European model ls likely to make little 
difference. Both models wm generate Incorrect values because the Inputs are Incorrect 
The American model may produce less error, but that will be small consolation If the 
incorrect Inputs lead to a large trading loss. • 
American option values are most Important when there ls a significant dlff erence 
between the carrying cost associated with the option and the carrying cost associated 
With the underlying contract. The greater the difference between the two carrying costs, 
the greater the value of early exercise. When the underlying contract Is a futures 
contract and the option on the contract Is subject to futures-type settlement, the cost of 
canylng either position Is, In theory, zero. This Is the same as assuming an effective 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

250 
Interest rate of zero. If we use a zero Interest rate, there Is no difference betw~l'r, 
European and Amertcan option values. 
When the options on a futures contract are sUbject to stock-type settlement, h~~ 
Is a small difference between the carrying cost on the option and the carl"flng cos (j 
the underlying contract. Although lhe option ls sUbject to stock-type settlement, . 
price of the optlon Is only a small fraction of the price of the underlying contract. The 
additional value for early exercise Is therefore small, and Is only llkely to show up 1 
deeply In-the-money options. Even In this case, the difference between European and 
American values Is often less than the minimum price Increment. In such a market, a 
trader Is unlikely to profit significantly because he ls using an American pricing model 
while other traders are using a European pricing model. Practical conslderatlons, such 
as the accuracy of the trader's volatlllty estimate, his ability to anticipate dJrectfonal 
trends In the underlying market, and his ability to control risk through eff ectJve 
spreading strategies, will far outweigh any small advantage gained by using an Amet1can 
rather than a European model. 
The importance of early exercise Is greatest when the underlying contract is a stock 
or physical commodity. 3 In such a case there Is a significant dlff erence between the 
canying cost on an option and the carrying cost on an underlying position. This 
difference will especially affect the difference between European and Arnertcan put 
values, since early exercise will allow the trader to earn Interest on the proceeds from 
the sale at the exercise price. An option trader in either the stock or physical commodity 
market will find that the additional accuracy offered by an American model, such as the 
Cox-Ross-Rubenstein or Whaley models, will indeed be worthwhile. The significance of 
this difference is shown In Agure 12· 1. 
THE EFFECT OF EARLY EXERCISE 
ON TRADING STRATEGIES 
Toe delta of an American option will always be greater than the delta of an equivalent 
European option. The extent to which it is greater will depend on how deeply 
in-the-money the option Is, as well as the Interest considerations resulting from early 
exercise. In most cases the delta of an American option wlll differ only slightly from a 
European option, and the possibility of early exercise is therefore unlikely to have a 
significant Impact on volatility or directional strategies. In the former case, a trader may 
have to adjust the ratio of a strategy slightly If he wants to remain close to delta neutral. 
In the latter case, a trader may find that he ls a few deltas longer or shorter than he 
would be If employing the same strategy with European options. 
Because early exercise of an option ls not automatic, there are strategies which 
depend on someone makJng an error and not exercising an option early when he ought 
to do so. For example, a stock option trader might oy to execute a dividend play. This 
strategy consists of buying stock and selling deeply ln·the·money calls as the ex-dividend 
3. Early exercise can also be an Important consideration In the loreJgn exchan~ market Jf the Jnterest 
rates associated With the domestJc currency {the currency 1n which the opUon 1s settled) and foreign 
currency {the currency to be delivered 1n the event of exerdse) are slgnillcantly d~erent 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

E* &trd.st of Amtrkan Options 
Figure 12-1 
EUl'OpMn va. Amettcan Put VIIUN 
Stod( prtco • 100.00 Volatlllty • 25%; Interest rate • 8.00%; Olvtdend • o 
4 weeks to expiration: 
Black-scholea Black-SCholff 
80put 
90put 
100put 
110 put 
120 put 
13 weeks to expiration: Value Delta 
.00 o 
.15 -6.0 
2.46 45.1 
9.67 ~9.5 
19.28 -99.4 
Black-scholea Black-scholff 
80put 
90put 
100put 
110 put 
120 put 
26 weeks to expiration: Value Dtltl 
.11 -2.2 
.97 -14.3 
◄.00 ...... 1.2 
10.00 -70.6 
18.25 ~9.2 
Black-scholN Black-SCholN 
80put 
90put 
100 put 
110 put 
120 put Value Delta 
.46 
1.89 
5.11 
10.◄3 
17.56 -5.7 
-18.1 
-37.7 
-58.9 
-76 .◄ Cox-RoM 
Value 
.00 
.15 
2.51 
10.03 
20.00 
Cox-Ro• 
Value 
.11 
1.00 
◄.20 
10.71 
20.00 
cox-Ro• 
Value 
.50 
2.02 
5.55 
11.58 
20.04 Cox-RON 
Delta 
0 
-5.1 
46.4 
~5.3 
-100.0 
Cox-Rote 
Delta 
-2.3 
-14.9 
◄4.0 
-78.2 
-100.0 
Cox-RoN 
Delta 
-6.1 
-19.6 
-42.1 
-68.8 
-94.8 2SJ 
date for the stock approaches. If the trader ts not assigned on the calls, he will break 
even on the stock (the stock price wlll fall, but he wlll collect the dividend). At the same 
time he wlll profit when the deeply In-the-money calls which he has sold fall by the 
amount of the dividend. Of course, If he ls assigned on the calls, as he ought to be, he 
wlll only break even. But for each call which goes unexerclsed the trader will profit by 
the amount of the dividend. Dividend plays were much more common ln the early days 
of option trading when the market was less sophisticated and many options which 
should have been exercised were not. As markets have become more efficient, only a 
professional trader, with very low transaction costs, can afford to take advantage of such 
a posslblllty. Even then, he may find that he ls assigned on the great majority of the calls 
he has sold. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

252 
A trader can execute a similar type of Interest play by seI//ng stock and sJ-.. 
ously selling deeply In-the-money puts. Now, Instead of pronung by the amount u ~ 
dividend, the trader will profit by the amount of the Interest he the ettr, t 
prtce (the proceeds of the stock sale and the put sale combined). ~~sea:n~~II con rq 
to accrue as long as the puts remain unexerclsed. If the puts are el'erc1sed, the ti11 
does no worse than break even. Again, only a professional trader with hJs ~ 
transaction costs, Is likely to employ such a strategy. ' 
If options are subject to stock-type settlement, an Interest play can also be dorie 
the futures option market by either purchasing a futures contract and slmultaneouQJ 
selling a deeply In-the-money call, or selllnga futures contract and simultaneously sel!ti 
a deeply In-the-money put. If the option Is deeply enough In-the-money, It ought co tt 
exercised early. If, however, the option remains unexerclsed, the trader wlll con~ 
to earn Interest on the proceeds from the option sale. Since the amount on whJch the 
trader wtll earn Interest Is the difference between the exercise price and futures prfct, 
thls wlll not be as profitable as a similar strategy In the stock option market, where~ 
trader wlll earn interest on the exercise price. Still, If the transaction costs are lot 
enough, It may be worth doing. 
A vartatlon on dividend and Interest plays can also be executed using deepfy 
In-the-money vertical spreads. For example, suppose a stock Is trading at I 00 with~ 
ex·dlvldend date approaching If both the 80 and 85 calls are deeply enough In-the­
money to be early exercise candidates, a trader might try to purchase the 80/85 call 
vertical spread for five points. If he does so, he wlll exercise his 80 call In order to collecr 
the dividend, and at the same Ume hope not to be assigned on the 85 call. Oddly, If both 
the 80 and 85 calls are early exercise candidates, the trader should also be willing to 
sell the 80/85 call vertical for five points. If he does so, he will exercise hls 85 call In 
order to collect the dividend, and at the same Ume hope not to be assigned on the 80 
call. ln other words, a professional trader might lo~cally make a market under these 
circumstances of 5 bld/5 ask. He ls willing to buy or sell the 80/85 call vertical at five 
points. He Intends to Immediately exercise whichever call he buys, while hoping not be 
assigned on the call whlch he sells. 
The posslblllty of early exercise can also have an Impact on arbitrage strate~es. For 
example, suppose a stock option trader executes a reverse conversion: 
buy a call 
sell a put 
sell stock 
If he executes thls strategy at what he believes to be profitable prices, part of hls profit 
will come from the Interest he expects to earn on the sale of the stock. But what will 
happen If the stock price be~ns to fall, and In fact falls so far that the trader Is assigned 
on the put? This wlll eliminate the Interest earnings, since he will be required to buy 
back the stock. Of course, he can still sell the call and take In some cash. But If the value 
of the call ls Insufficient to offset the Interest loss, the trader may find that hls profitable 
reversal has In fact become unprofitable. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

253 
The trader tn our example Is worrted about being assigned on his put. ff the market 
drops there will be a greater llkellhood of assignment; If the market rises there will be 
a lesser llkellhood of assignment. Since the trader prefers the market to rise, he must be 
delta long. Tots ts confirmed by the followtng delta values: 
~tock price = 1 OOi Time to expiration= 3 months; Volatility= 25% 
Interest rate= 8.00%; Dividend = O 
Option 
100 call 
100 put European 
Value 
5.97 
4.00 European 
Delta 
58.8 
-41.2 American 
Value 
5.97 
4.20 
If these are European options, the total delta of the reversal ls: 
+58.8 +41.2 -100 = 0 
If, however, the options are American, the total delta is: 
+58.8 +44.0 -100 = +2.8 American 
Delta 
58.8 
-44.0 
The positive delta of 2.8 reflects a slight preference for the market to rtse so that the 
trader will avoid being assigned on the put. 
For a similar reason, if the trader executes a conversion (sell call, buy put, buy 
stock), he ls 2.8 deltas short. He wants the stock to fall so that he can exercise his put 
early and thereby avoid the interest costs of carrying a long stock position. 
Because the desirability of early exercise, and therefore the likelihood of early 
exercise, can increase or decrease as the underlying market rtses or falls, conversions 
and reversals using American options are not delta neutral. While these strategies may 
be unbalanced by only two or three deltas, the fact that they are often done in large size 
can result in an additional risk that the trader cannot afford to ignore. This also applies 
to boxes and jelly rolls, which are simply combinations of conversions and reversals. 
Consider these option values: 
Stock price = 100; Volatility= 25%; Interest rate = 8.00%; Dividend = 0 
Time to expiration: March = 3 months, June = 6 months 
European European American American 
Option Value Delta Value Delta 
March 95 call 9.00 73.7 9.00 73.7 
March 95 put 2.13 -26.3 2.24 -27.8 
March 100 call 5.97 58.8 5.97 58.8 
March 100 put 4.00 -41.2 4.20 -44.0 
June 95 call 11.96 72.7 11.96 72.7 
June 95 put 3.24 -27.3 3.49 -29.9 
June 100 call 9.03 62.3 9.03 62.3 
June 100 put 5.11 -37.7 5.55 -42.1 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 4 ChApttr 12 
W ca,1 s e how the possibility of early exercise affects the values and deltas of vart01J1 arbitrages: 
European European American Amerfan 
Strategy Value Delta Value Delta 
March 95/100 box 4.90 0 4.99 -1.3 
June 95/100 box 4.80 0 4.99 -1.8 
March/June 95 jelly roll 1.85 0 1.71 +1.l 
March/June 100 jelly roll 1.95 0 1.71 +1.6 
Boxes become more valuable using American options because a trader who Is long 
the box owns a put with a higher exercise prtce. If a trader buys the 95/1 oo box, he Is 
long a 95 call and a 100 put, and short a 95 put and 100 call. The too put win become 
an early exercise candidate before the 95 put, maklng the American box more valuable 
than the same European box. The delta of the box ls negative With American options 
because a trader who owns the box would like the market to decline so that he will be 
able to exercise the 100 put as quickly as possible. 
Jelly rolls become less valuable using American options because a trader who owns 
the jelly roll has sold a long-term put. If a trader buys the March/June 100 jelly roll, he 
ts long a March 100 put and June 100 call, and ls short a March 100 call and June l 00 
put The June 100 put, being a longer term option, has more potential for early exercise 
than the March 100 put. The delta of the jelly roll ls therefore positive because there is 
a greater danger of being assigned on the June 100 put Hence, the trader who owns 
the jelly roll would like the market to rise so that he Is less likely to be assigned on the 
June 100 put. 
A unique, early exercise situation affecting the value of boxes can also artse in a 
stock option market if there Is a tender offer to buy a portion of the stock in a company. 
For example, with a stock trading at 100, one would expect to see the 100/105 box 
trading at close to five points. But suppose that a tender offer Is made to buy half the 
outstanding shares at a prtce of 110. A trader who owns the 100/105 box will exercise 
his 100 calls in order to be able to tender stock. H he tenders 1000 shares, he might 
expect half, or 500 shares, to be accepted at the tender price of 110. But after the tender 
Is completed, because it was for only half the outstanding shares, the stock price will 
return to Its pre-tender price of 100. The trader's remalnlng 500 shares will still be 
trading at 100. In other words, prior to the tender offer the 100 calls are worth I 0, but 
after the tender the 105 puts are worth a minimum of five. Of course, one cannot say 
that the box Is worth 15, because only half the outstanding shares are worth 110. The 
other half are worth 100. Still, the 100/105 box ls likely to trade for significantly more 
than Its usual price of five. 
The possibility of early exercise can also affect arbitrage strategies In the futures 
option market, but the difference between American versus European values ls much 
less than in the stock option market because there ls less interest consideration 
associated with futures options. For practical purposes, unless the options are very 
deeply In-the-money or are very long-term, the difference between American and 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

~ F.xtrt~ of Amtrlan Options 
255 
European values for futures options Is negligible. Some sample option and art>ltrage 
values are shown below (we assume that all opUons are sub/ect to stock-type settle­ment): 
Futures price= 100; VolatJUty = 25%; Interest rate= B.OO%; 
nme to expiration: March = 3 months, June = 6 months 
Option 
Marcil 95 call 
March 95 put 
March 100 call 
March 100 put 
June 95 call 
June 95 put 
June 1 00 call 
June 100 put 
Strategy 
March 95 conversion 
June 95 conversion 
March l 00 conversion 
June l 00 conversion 
March 95/100 box 
June 95/100 box 
March/June 95 Jelly roll 
March/June 100 jelly roll European European 
Value Delta 
7.60 66.9 
2.70 -31.2 
4.88 51.5 
4.88 -46.6 
9.27 62.2 
4.46 -33.9 
6.76 51.4 
6.76 -44.7 
European European 
Value Delta 
4.90 +1.9 
4.81 +3.9 
0 +1.9 
0 +3.9 
4.90 0 
4.81 0 
1.85 0 
1.95 0 American 
Value 
7.67 
2.73 
4.88 
4.88 
9.34 
4.48 
6.80 
6.80 
American 
VaJue 
4.94 
4.86 
0 
0 
4.94 
4.86 
1.71 
1.71 American 
Delta 
67.5 
-31.3 
51.8 
-46.9 
63.5 
-34.2 
52.2 
-45.4 
American 
Delta 
+1.2 
+2.3 
+1.3 
+2.4 
+.1 
+.1 
+1.1 
+1.6 
Many new traders seem to worry unduly about the possiblllty of early exercise: "If 
I sell an opUon, what happens If I am suddenly assigned?" It Is true that sometimes early 
aSSignment can cause a loss. But there are many factors which can cause a trader to lose 
money; early exercise ls only one such factor. A trader should be prepared to deal with 
the posslblllty of early exercise just as he should be prepared to deal with the posslblUty 
of movement In the prtce of the underlying contract, or the posslblJlty of changes In 
volatllJty. Margin requirements established by the clearing houses usually requJre a 
trader to keep sufficient funds In his account to cover the posslblllty of early assignment 
But this Is not always true. If he ls short deeply In-the-money optlons, an early 
assignment notlce may cause a cash squeeze. If this happens, he wm need sufficient 
capital to cover the situation. Otherwise, he may be forced to liquidate some or all of 
the remaining posltlon. And forced llquldatlons are Invariably losing proposltlons. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

256 C/ypttr 12 
An experienced trader should be able to foresee the llkellhood of early exerc1se. He 
need only ask himself: .. If I owned thls option, would I logically exercise It now?'' If~ 
answer ls "yes," then the trader ought to be prepared for assignment. Early exercise 
rarely comes as a surprtse. If It does, it Is probably good for the trader who was assigned. 
If an option ls exercised too early, someone has erroneously abandoned the tlme value 
or protective characterlstlcs associated with the option. When that happens, the trader 
who ls assigned wlll find that he has Just received an unexpected gift 