The Language of Options 
Every option market brings together traders and investors With different expectations 
and goals. Some enter the market with an opinion on which dlrectlon prices will move. 
Some Intend to use options to protect existing positions against adverse prtce move­
ment. Some hope to take advantage of pr1ce discrepancies between similar or related 
products. Some act as middlemen, buying and selling as an accommodation to other 
market participants and hoping to profit from the difference between the bid and ask 
price. 
Even though expectations and goals differ, every trader's education must begin 
wlth an introduction to the tennlnology of option trading, and to the rules and 
regulations which govern trading activity. Without a faclllty In the language of options, 
a trader will find it impossible to communicate his desire to buy or sell In the 
marketplace. Without a clear understanding of the terms of an option contract, and his 
rights and responslblllties under that contract, a trader cannot hope to make the best 
use of options, nor will he be prepared for the very real risks of trading. 
CONTRACT SPECIFICATIONS 
Options are of two types. A call option ls the right to buy or take a long position in a 
given asset (typically a security, commodity, Index, or futures contract) at a fixed prtce 
on or before a specified date. A put option ls the right to sell or take a short position in 
a given asset. 
Note the difference between an option and a futures contract. A futures contract 
requires delivery at a fixed price. The buyer and seller of a futures contract both have 
obligations which they must meet. The seller must make delivery and the buyer must 
take delivery of the asset. The buyer of an option, however, has a choice. He can choose 
to take delivery (a call) or make delivery (a put). If the buyer of an option chooses to 
either make or take delivery, the seller of the option is obligated to take the other side. 
In option trading all rights lie with the buyer and all obligations with the seller. 
The asset to be bought or sold under the terms of the option ls the underly[ngasset 
or, more simply, the underlying. The exercise price, or strike price, ls the price at which 
the underlying will be delivered should the holder of an option choose to exercise his 
right to buy or sell. The date after which the optlon may no longer be exercised is the 
expiration date. 
I 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ch,pt1r I 
2 
If an option 1s purchased directly from a bank or other dealer, the quantlty of the 
underlying to be delivered, the exercise prtce, and the explratlon date can all be tallored 
to meet the buyer's individual requirements. If the option ls purchased on an exchange, 
the quantity of the underlying to be delivered, as well as the exercise price and 
explratlon date, are predetermined by the exchange.1 
As an example of an exchange traded option, the buyer of a crude oll October 21 
call on the New York Mercantile Exchange has the right to take a long position ln one 
October crude oil futures contract for 1,000 barrels of crude oll (the underlying), at a 
price of $21 per barrel (the exercise price), on or before October expiration (the 
exptratlon date). The buyer of a General Electric March 80 put on the Chicago Board 
Options Exchange has the right to take a short posltlon ln 100 shares of General Electric 
stock (the underlying) at a price of $80 per share (the exercise price), on or before March 
exptratlon (the expiration date). 
Since stock has no expiration date, the underlying asset for a stock option ls simply 
some number of shares in the underlying stock. In the case of futures options, however, 
the situation can be somewhat confusing, since a futures contract has a llmlted llfe span. 
Toe underlying asset for an option on a futures contract ts usually the futures month 
Identical to the expiration month of the option. The underlying asset for a crude oil 
October 21 call on the NYMEX is one October crude oll futures contract The 
underlying asset for a Treasury Bond June 96 put on the Chicago Board of Trade ls one 
June Treasury Bond futures contract 
Some futures exchanges also llst serial options, whereby options with different 
expiration dates have identical underlying futures contracts. When there ls no futures 
contract with the same expiration month as the option, the underlying contract for that 
option ls the nearest futures contract after the expiration of the option. For example, 
the underlying for a December Deutschemark option on the Chicago Mercantile 
Exchange ls one December Deutschemark futures contract With no October or 
November futures contract available, the underlying for an October or November 
Deutschemark option ls also one December futures contract December ls the nearest 
futures month after the expiration of October and November options. 
Expiration dates for exchange traded contracts are not uniform, but are set by each 
indivldual exchange. The expiration date for stock options In the United States 1s usually 
the thJrd Saturday after the third Friday of the expiration month. For options on fu~ 
contracts, however, the expiration need not coincide with the delivery month spectfled 
in the option contract In some cases the exact expiration date for a futures option can 
Predate tbe dellvaymonth of the underlying futureS contract by several weeks. A crude 
oll option on the NYMEX will typically expire the first Saturday of the preceding mon~ 
~ that an October option 'Wlll actually expire the ft.rst Saturday ln SeotPmM" 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Langu,ge of Options 3 
Figure 1-1: Contract Specifications 
Crude on· October 21 call i t t i Expiration Exercise 
Under1ylng Date Prioe Type ! ! ! t 
GE March 80 Put 
•i, this Is a futures option, the unde~ylng Is a futures contract rather than the physical commodity. 
Figure 1-2: An Option Buy Order 
BUY C _(p) GTC 
GE JAN APA 
31/1 \0 FEB MAY 10 
~ STOCK e ~ EXPX PREM 
CON Jll. OCT 
AUG N<:N 
CXL SEP DEC 
FUS 
EX TIME 
FB/88 
TAKEN BY RNR FlRM 
M/M ,CCTII 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 
Figure 1-3: An Option Sell Order 
(~ 
hr 
SELL p GTC 
25 OEX JAN APR 
Fl:8 MAY 425 \Ol. Stocf< MAA JUN 1 '/i 
JUL EXP)( ~~4 00N OCT 
AUG E) 
ca. SEP OEc 
AUS 
EX. TIME 
FB/BB 
TAKEN BY RNR ARM 
M/M NXT# 
EXERCISE AND ASSIGNMENT 
A trader who owns a call or a put option has the right to exercise that option prior to 
its expiration date, thereby converting the option into a long underlying position, in the 
case of a call, or a short underlying position, in the case of a put. A trader who exercises 
a crude oil October 21 call has chosen to take a long position In one October crude oil 
futures contract at $21 per barrel. A trader who exercises a GE March 80 put has chosen 
to take a short position in I 00 shares of GE stock at $80 per share. Once an option is 
exercised it ceases to exist, just as if it had been allowed to expire unexerdsed. 
A trader who intends to exercise an option must submit an exercise notice to either 
the seller of the option, if purchased from a dealer, or to the guarantor of the option, if 
purchased on an exchange. When a valid exercise notice is submitted, the seller of the 
option is assigned. Depending on the type of option, he Will be required to take a Jong 
or short position in the underlying contract at the specified exercise price. 
In addition to its underlying contract, exercise price, expiration date, and type, an 
option is further identified by the conditions of exercise. An option Is either American, ,., 
I 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

........--
Thi w,gua,, of Options 
Figure 1-4: The Ex1rcl11 Ind A11lgn 
,_. [ Clearing Hous 
Clearing firm notifies th 
clearing house that the 
bttytr wishes to extrcl e. 
t 
Buyer's Clearing Firm 
t 
Buyer notifies his clearing firm 
that he wishes to exercise his 
optiOn, thereby taking a long 
(call) or short (put) position 
in the underlying instrument 
at the exercise price. 
+ 
Holder of a Long 
Option Position 
(Buyer) 
Figure 1-5: An Exercise Notice 
DATE EXERCISE 
I I NOTICE 
PUT ~ 
STRIKE PURCHASED 
QTY STKJCOMM MONTH PRICE TODAY 
I \0 I 01\"\ I 1\/\().[ \ Sc l YESl)(I 
I I I I I l I 
I I I I I l I 
I I I I I I I 
I I I I l I I ► 
l s 
\ Cl9srln hou choo a 
HIier at rt1ndom and notifl99 
th4 sell r's olear1ng flrm that 
the seller has been MSIQned. 
t 
\ Sellet's Clearlrlg,Firm 
~ 
Seller is notified by his clearing 
firm that he has been assigned, 
and that he now has a short 
(call) or long (put) position 
in the underlying instrument 
at the exercise price. 
' Holder of a Short 
Option Position 
(Seller) 
TIME STAMP 
Initials: SHN 
Account# 
Firm# 
Broker# 
Per I 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6 Chapter I 
Figure 1-6: An Assignment Notice 
DATE ASSIGNMENT 
I I NOTICE 
ITIIIKI 
QTY tTl(JCOMII MONTH l'RICE l'VT CALL 
I \'j IG~e o, I I Cc+. I \B I I ti RJN Initials: 
[ 5 I '. fu-rls I Dec. I \CS I >( I I Account# 
[ I I I I I I Firm# 
[ I I I I I I 
[ I I I I I I 
whereby the holder can exercise the option at any time prior to explratlon, or European, 
whereby the holder can exercise the option only on expiration day.2 The great majority 
of exchange traded options throughout the world are American options, carrying with 
them the right of early exercise. Indeed, all U.S. exchange traded stock and futures 
options are Amertcan. 3 
As in any competitive market, an option's price, or premium, ls detennlned by 
supply and demand. Buyers and sellers make competitive bids and offers ln the 
marketplace. When a bid and offer coincide, a trade ls made. The premium paid for an 
option can be separated into two components, the Intrinsic value and the time value. 
An option's intrinsic value ls the amount which would be credited to the option holder's 
account if he were to exercise the option and close out the posltlon against the 
underlying contract at the current market price. For example, with gold trading at $435 
per ounce, the intrinsic value of a $400 call ls $35. By exercising his option, the holder 
of the $400 call can buy gold at $400 per ounce. If he sells gold at the market price of 
2. SJnce exchanges need Ume to process exercise and ~gnmP.nt notices, the holder of an exchange 
traded optton must usually submit an exercise notice no later than the dose o! buslnt?$ on the day prtot 
tn PYnlr:1tfnn 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tht un,u,,t of Options 7 
$435 per ounce, $35 per ounce will be credited to h1s account With a certain stock 
trading at $62, the Intrinsic value of a $70 put 1s $8. By exercising hls option, the holder 
of the put can sell the stock at $70 per share. If he then buys the stock back at the market 
price of $62, he w1ll show a total credit of $8. 
A call will only have Intrinsic value If Its exercise price Is less than the current 
market price of the underlying contract A put will only have lntrlnslc value If Its exercise 
price ls greater than the current market price of the underlying contract The amount 
of Intrinsic value Is the amount by which the call's exercise price ts less than the current 
underlying price, or the amount by which the put's exercise price ls greater than the 
current underlying price. No option can have an Intrinsic value less than zero. 
Usually an option's price In the marketplace will be greater than Its Intrtnslc value. 
The additional amount of premium beyond the Intrinsic value which traders are wUllng 
to pay for an option ls the time value, sometimes also referred to as the option's time 
premium or extrinsic value. As we shall see, market participants are willing to pay this 
additional amount because of the protective characteristics afforded by an option over 
an outright long or short position in the underlying contract 
An option's premium Is always composed of precisely its Intrinsic value and Its time 
value. If a $400 gold call ls trading at $50 with gold at $435 per ounce, the time value 
of the call must be $15, since the Intrinsic value ls $35. The two components must add 
up to the option's total premium of $50. If a $70 put on a stock Is trading for $9 with 
the stock at $62, the time value of the put must be $1, since the Intrinsic value ts $8. 
The Intrinsic value and the time value must add up to the option's premium of $9. 
Even though an option's premium is always composed of its intrinsic value and Its 
time value, It ls possible for one or both of these components to be zero. If the option 
has no intrinsic value, its price In the marketplace wlll consist solely of time value. If the 
option has no time value, its price wlll consist solely of lntrtnslc value. In the latter case, 
we say that the option ls trading at pancy. 
While an option's intrinsic value can never be less than zero, It ls possible for an 
option, if it ls European, to have a negative time value. (More about this when we look 
at early exercise in Chapter 12.) When this happens the option can trade for less than 
parity. Usually, however, an option's premium will reflect some non·negative amount 
of Intrinsic and time value. 
Any option which has a positive Intrinsic value Is said to be ln-the-money by the 
amount of the intrinsic value. With a stock at $44, a $40 call Is $4 ln•the-money. With 
Deutschemarks at 57.75, a 59 put ls 1.25 in-the-money. An option which has no 
intrinsic value is said to be out-ofthe-money. The price of an out-of-the-money option 
consists solely of time value. In order to be ln•the-money, a call (put) must have an 
exercise price lower (higher) than the current price of the underlying contract Note 
that if a call Is in-the-money, a put with the same exercise price and underlying contract 
must be out-of·the-money. Conversely, If the put ls In-the-money, a call with the same 
exercise prtce must be out-of·the-money. 
Finally, an option whose exercise price ls identical to the current price of the 
underlying contract is said to be at-the-money. Technically, such an option is also 
out-of-the-money since it has no intrinsic value. We make the distinction between an 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8 
Figure 1-7: In-and Out-of-th Money Options 
current 
Underlylng 
Price 
Lower Exercise Prlct1 Higher Exercl1e Price, 
In-the-Money Calls Out-of-the-Money Calls 
Out-of-the-Money Puts In-the-Money Puts Chapter I 
► 
at-the-money and out-of-the-money option because an at-the-money option has the 
greatest amount of time premium and Is usually traded very actively. 
If we want to be very precise, the exercise price of an option must be identical to 
the current price of the underlying contract for the option to be at-the-money. However, 
for exchange-traded options, the term is commonly applied to the call and put whose 
exercise price is closest to the current price of the underlying contract With a stock at 
$74 and $5 between exercise prices ($65, $70, $75, $80, etc.), the $75 call and the 
$75 put would be considered the at-the-money options. These are the call and put 
options with exercise prices closest to the current price of the underlying contract. 
MARKET INTEGRITY 
An important consideration for every market participant ls the Integrity of the market. 
No trader wlll want to trade in a market where there ls a chance that the opposing trader 
will default on a contract. If a trader purchases an option, he wants to be certain that 
the seller will fulfill the terms of the contract If the option ls exercised. 
In order to guarantee that the integrity of the market will be maintained, each 
options exchange has established a progression of responsibllity for the fulfillment of the 
terms of an option. The primary responsibility falls to the Individual trader. If the seller 
of an option is assigned, he must be prepared to take the required long or short position 
in the underlying contract at the specifled exercise price. In practical terms, this means 
a trader must have access to capital at least equal to the option's intrinsic value. 
If an individual trader ls unable to fulfill the terms of the contract, the responsibility 
falls to the trader's clearing firm. A clearing firm ls a member firm of the exchange which 
processes trades made by an Individual, and which agrees to fulfill any financial 
obllgatlon arising from those trades. No Individual may trade on an exchange without 
first becoming associated with a clearing firm. 
If the clearing firm cannot fulfill the terms of the contract, the final responsibility 
rests With the clearing house. Each exchange has establlshed, or has become a member 
of, a dearing house which guarantees the Integrity of all trades. Once an option trade 
has been made, the connection between the buyer and seller is severed, wtth the 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

L,ngu ofOpttons 
clearing house assuming the role of buyer from every seller, and seller to every buyer. 
If there were no central clearing house, the buyer of an option would be totally 
dependent on the good faith of the seller or the seller's clearing nrm to fulfill the terms 
of the option In the event of exercise. Because the clearing house guarantees every trade, 
all buyers can be certain there wlll be an opposing party prepared to make or take 
delivery If an option ls exercised. The clearing process Is shown In Figure 1 ·8. 
This system of guarantees has proven effective In ensuring the Integrity of options 
exchanges. While Individual traders and clearing firms occasionally fall, a clearing house 
has never failed in the United States. 
MARGIN REQUIREMENTS 
When a trader makes an opening trade on an exchange, the exchange may require the 
trader to deposit with the clearing house some amount of margin, or good faith capital.4 
Such deposits ensure that if the market moves adversely, the trader will still be able to 
fulfill any future financial obligations resulting from the trade. 
In lieu of cash, margin requirements may often be met by depositing government 
treasury instruments or, less commonly, commercial securities. Clearing flnns collect 
these margin requirements from their traders and forward the funds to the clearing 
Figure 1-8: The Clearing Process 
If reports from both clearing 
firms match, the trade 
becomes official. 
1~----- -►-1 Clearing House I ◄~...---- --,1 
! If the reports do not match, ! T they are returned to each T 
clearing firm, and from there Buyer's clearing firm to the individual traders Seller's clearing firm 
reports trade to for rectification . reports trade to -1- -1-
, Buyer's Clearing Firm I I Seller's Clearing Firm j t t 
Buyer reports trade Seller reports trade 
to his clearing firm. to his clearing firm. 
L ◄◄..,__-I Trading Floor 1----►~_J 
Buyer and seller agree 
on a contract, quantity, 
and price. 
4. Margin requirements for a profesfilOnal trader In an equity option market are referred to as a /litrcut. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10 (Jypttr I 
house. In theory, margin deposits at the clearing house sun belong to the 1nd1vtduaJ 
trader and, as such, any Interest or dividends accruing to the margin deposit also belong, 
to the trader. Some deartng firms, however, do not return thJs Interest to the trader, 
claiming that It Is part of the fee paid by the trader for the clearing servtces of the member 
firm. This can occasionally become a sensltlve point between trader and clearing flnn, 
and should be settled before an Individual begins to trade. 
Margin requirements for both options and underlying contracts are set by the 
clearing house, using as guidelines the current value of the posJtlon as well as the 
potential risk. While an underlying position, particularly If It Is a futures contrac~ usually 
has a fixed margin requirement, the margin for an opUon posluon can change over tfrne 
since the margin for an optlon often depends on the amount by which It 1s In· or 
out-of-the-money. Posltlons consisting of a combination of options, or optlons and 
underlying Instruments, may have reduced margin requirements because the rtsk to one 
contract may be partially offset by the value of another contract Additionally, traders 
who are exchange members may receive professional conslderatlon in the fonn of 
reduced margin requirements. Every trader should become familiar with the margin 
requirements for the market In which he Is trading. Doing so will ensure that he has 
sufficient capital to Initiate and hold positions as long as he deems necessary. 
SETfLEMENT PROCEDURES 
New option traders are often confused because settlement procedures may vary from 
one exchange to another. Indeed, settlement procedures for an option and Its underlying 
contract may differ. Two methods are commonly used to settle exchange-traded 
contracts-stock-type settlement and futures-type settlement. 
Suppose a trader buys 100 shares of a $50 stock. The value of the stock Is $5,000, 
and the buyer ls required to pay the seller the full amount. If the stock rises to $60 per 
share, the owner of the stock will show a profit of $10 per share, or a total profit of 
$1,000. Even so, he won't be able to actually spend this $1,000 profit until he fonnally 
llquldates the position by selllng his 100 shares at $60 per share. This type of settlement 
procedure, where purchase requires full and Immediate payment, and where profits or 
losses are unrealized until the posltlon ls liquidated, ls known as stock-type settlement. 
In contraSt to stock-type settlement, futures-type settlement requires no Initial cash 
payment from the buyer to the seller. Moreover, all profits or losses are Immediately 
realized, even If the poslUon Is not liquidated. If a trader buys a gold futures contract 
covertng 100 ounces of gold for $450 per ounce, the full value of the contract ls 
$45,000. The buyer, however, Is not required to pay the seller the full $45,000 value 
of the contract The buyer does not have to pay any money at all. He ls only required to 
deposit with the clearing house some amount of good-faith margin. At the end of each 
trading day both the buyer and the seller will Immediately realize any profits or losses 
resulting from movement In the price of the gold futures contract. If gold rises from $450 
to S470 per ounce, s2,ooo ($20 x 100) will be credited to the buyer's account and he 
:~rs~~~ :m~latef use of these funds even If he does not liquidate the position. Of 
' e P ce O gold drops to $430 per ounce, he will realize an Immediate loss 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thi un,uAI' o/Optfons II 
of $2,000. If he does not have sufflctent funds In his account to cover this loss, the 
ctearln& house wt II Issue a var1atton ca II. 
Toere IS an important distinction between a margin call and a variation call. A 
margin call Is Issued by the clearing house to ensure that a trader can futnll future 
financial obllgatlons should the market move against him. Margin calls can be met wtth 
funds which, even though deposited at the clearing house, still belong to the trader and 
consequently can earn Interest for the trader. A variation call ls Issued In order to fulfill 
current financial obligations In the form of realized losses. A variation call must be met 
with a cash payment which Is Immediately deducted from a trader's account. If a trader 
has deposited securities With the clearing house as margin and receives a variation call, 
he must either deposit the additional variation amount in cash, or the clearing house 
will sell the securities in his account to generate enough cash to meet the variation call. 
If the remaining securities and cash In the account Is not sufficient to meet the current 
margl.n requirements, the trader may be forced to liquidate his position. 
We make this very important distinction between stock-and futures-type settle­
ment because some options are settled like stock and some options are settled like 
futures. It is important for a trader to know which he Is trading. Currently all 
exchange-traded options in the United States, whether options on stock, futures, 
indices, or foreign currencies, are settled like stock. Options must be paid for immedi· 
ately and In full, and profits or losses are unrealized until the position ls liquidated. In 
stock option markets this ls both logical and consistent, since both the underlying 
contract and options on that contract are settled using identical procedures. However, 
on U.S. futures options markets, the underlying contract ls settled one way (futures-type 
settlement) while the options are settled In a different way (stock-type settlement). This 
can sometimes cause problems when a trader has bought or sold an option to hedge a 
futures position. Even if the profits from the option position exactly offset the losses from 
the futures position, the profits from the option position, because the options are settled 
like stock, are only paper profits. On the other hand, the losses from the futures position 
will require an immediate cash outlay to cover a variation call. If a trader is unaware of 
the different settlement procedures, he can occasionally find himself with unexpected 
cash flow problems. 
The settlement situation on many exchanges outside the U.S. has been slmpllfted 
by making option and underlying settlement procedures 'identical. If the underlying ls 
subject to stock-type settlement, then so are the options on the underlying. If the 
underlying is subject to futures-type settlement, then so are the options. Under this 
method a trader is unlikely to get a surprise variation call on a position which he thinks 
ls well hedged. 
Before concluding this chapter, lt will be useful to define the terms Jong and short 
as they are used in option trading versus their use in trading an underlying contract. In 
a long underlying position a trader will profit if prtces rise and lose lf prices fall. In a short 
underlying position a trader will profit lf prices fall and lose if prices rise. There Is a 
tendency to carry this terminology over into the option market by referring to any 
position which wtll profit from a rise tn the prtce of the underlying contract as a long 
position, and any posltlon which wtll profit from a fall in price as a short positlon. 

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12 
More generally, however, the terms long and short refer to the purchase or sale 0, 
a contract, and this ts the sense In which we apply these terms to option trading. A trade, 
who has purchased an option is long the option, and a trader who has sold the opuon 
ts short. There is no confusion when we refer to a long call position because the trader 
who ts long a call also has a long market position. Calls will, In theory, rise In value if 
the underlying market rises. But a long put position ls a shon market position. A trader 
who has purchased a put wants the underlying market to decline because a put Will 
theoretically increase in value as the market declines. Throughout the text, whenever 
there ls the possibillty of confusion, an attempt wlll be made to distinguish between a 
long or short market position versus a long or short option position. 